[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Okay. Oh, wow.

Okay. Very few room in this room. See, that doesn't have a clock.

That's unusual. Okay, so. Oh, wait.

Huh? Oh, the time is right. Okay, at least I can start now.

Five past already? Um, so. Like I said yesterday, um, I won't take all the lecture slots.

Okay. So I feel I have plenty of time.

So my part is mostly project based, and, um, all the project information is already on canvas, so you should have all the information on canvas now.

Uh, and we'll give you more instruction for the interview and final interview.

Okay. Um, one of the main reasons why I don't have a lot of lectures, because this part of the course is already very tight, timely ones.

Okay, so, uh, not for not for master's students.

You guys will have more time to cover students. They have a one week off for a different course.

So we ignite all the pathways. Students are gone.

They are completely blocked off to do another big project. Um, so next Monday we will.

Did you get my email about forming the project groups? Yes. Are you able to form the project groups now?

Is the project group available on canvas now? Oh, yeah. Yes.

Yeah. Okay, so form your project group as soon as possible, because by next month, they will hand out the project hardware kit that you need to use.

Uh, and we'll only hand it out if you have your group. Um, I think I mentioned the deadline.

Okay. Thanks. Friday. Yeah. Sounds of Friday sometime on Friday.

After that time, I'll start randomly allocate people into groups. Okay.

Uh, so next week is week eight.

We will start the first, uh, the Getting Started project for Getting Started lab for this project.

So next week's project, like next week's lab, is basically giving you a heads up about how to use that embedded hardware,

because you need to program a microcontroller for this part of the project,

and you need to design a human motion tracker to track the step and orientation.

Okay. Very simple project. Um, so the first part of the project, you need to do some readings.

Okay. So I want you to read four extra papers to find out the existing step tracking and orientation tracking algorithms.

Okay, bye. Week ten. Week ten Tuesday. You need to do a demonstration.

Hello? Yeah, well, you already heard that yesterday.

I'm just telling people the the the overall project timeline.

Okay. So by week ten Tuesday, you need to at least be able to read data from sensors.

And you need to actually show us that you actually know how to interpret the sensor data, right?

If you don't know how to interpret the sensor data. You won't be able to design an algorithm to detect the steps and orientation.

Questions? Yeah. Sorry. I want to know what type of the microcontroller.

What type? What sorry. What type? What type type?

SD uh, stm32 FC 32. Yeah, yeah.

Okay. So I mean, it's actually one of the most common ARM based.

Microcontrollers. So, um, if you're familiar with systems that you do, that's definitely a plus.

Yeah. Okay. Uh, so, uh, Tuesday, week ten, that's when you need to do the intern demo and submit the literature review report.

Again, it's not a big literature review report. It's just one page. Right?

I'm only asking everyone to read four papers, so I'm not expecting people submitting ten pages to me.

Okay. Um, and then you have, uh, week ten.

That's the intern interview. You have week 11, and then week 12 is the final demo.

Yeah. So you see what I mean? You know that this part of the course is actually very tight.

Um, and I would expect you to spend more time in the lab implementing the project.

Right. On average. We're still expecting you to spend ten hours a week for.

For each course. Yeah. Okay. So I think I think I probably, most likely I won't use the entire two hours today.

Um, you know, that's quite exhausting. Uh, I think I'll probably use one to 1.5 hour today, and then I will have another one hour next Wednesday.

And I think that's all my lectures from that point on.

We will expect you to fully focus on your lab. Okay, cool.

Um, so just to, um, quickly run through the, um, the context.

So my part of lecture, um, is more about sensor networks.

Okay. So I'm using wireless sensor network as a context for embedded systems.

Okay. Because that's a very typical application. Um, most of the existing, uh, real world application, you know, home automation, wearable devices,

you know, um, uh, intelligent, you know, electric vehicle, they're actually all embedded systems.

They're all variant of wireless sensor networks. Okay. And yesterday I introduced the concept of ubiquitous computing.

So if you're interested you can go through yesterday's lecture recording.

But like I said, you know, this course we have no, uh, exams. Right.

So I'm just trying to provide you a context and, uh, bring some.

System level design thinking that you should be aware of when you are designing, uh, embedded systems, um, in real life.

And I think yesterday I, I that's where I start that um, so I was looking at, um, Energy constraints for embedded systems.

Okay. One of the main things I mentioned yesterday is that when people are getting started with embedded systems,

one of the main, um, purpose of embedded systems is hoping for mobility.

Right. We want to make devices smaller and smaller so that they become mobile.

They become portable so that humans can it's more easily deployable or human users can carry them around.

And very soon after, you know, people are being able to make things smaller.

People start realising, um, just by having a smaller device is only half of the story.

You need to have connectivity, right?

If you if you think about any real world application, if you have an embedded device but you don't have wireless communication with that device,

all of a sudden that device is not that useful anymore. Right.

Thinking about your mobile phone. If it's just a small computer that has no Wi-Fi, no, no, no cellular connection.

How useful that small device is, right?

So that's why very often embedded systems and wireless communication go side by side.

Okay. And that's why I'm choosing wireless sensor network as a context.

Because it very well captures both requirements and and and and and in that context and also applies to just about all embedded systems.

Energy is definitely one of the biggest constraints okay.

Because without wire attached, uh, most of the embedded systems are actually battery powered.

Right. So that makes energy consumption a critical, uh, design challenge for embedded systems.

Okay. And one of the main things I do want to reiterate is when you're designing an embedded system, it is almost always Cross layer design.

Okay. There is I, I'm not seeing a lot of challenges in embedded systems that you only need to look at one layer of the system design.

Okay. So here I'm giving you an example. When you're designing an embedded system and you want it to be energy or power efficient.

You can look at a physical physical layer right how the microelectronics are actually designed.

Right. The the the electronic component you choose will determine how power efficient are the devices.

And it also depends on what kind of wireless communication protocol you're selecting.

Okay. Different communication protocols will have different, uh, energy consumptions.

Uh, and depending on protocol the network layer will determine how routeing is done.

Different routeing protocols will also determine how power hungry certain protocol is.

Uh, Whether your application requires you to have an operating system.

Not all application requires you to have operating system. And how secure do you need your device to be, right?

If you want to, if you want to make it very secure, if you want to do encryption, then encryption will create extra overhead, right?

To generate encrypted packet. That operation itself is consuming energy.

Right. And encrypted data will inevitably be larger than raw data.

Okay. So there will be more data to be transmitted through wireless communication.

So security will cause a lot of power concerns at different levels.

Middleware is a it's a less used term these days.

Um, but uh, in this context we're referring to if you're collecting sensor data,

obviously you can sense you can send all the sensor data to a central location,

for example, the cloud to do processing, or you can actually do some pre-processing, right.

So for example, if you're collecting sensor data at 60Hz, that's actually very fast, right?

Every second you're getting 60 sample data. Do you need to send all of them.

Okay. Does your application require you to have such high sampling rate?

Does whatever. For example, the signal processing or machine learning algorithm you're running at a remote site requires such a high sampling rate?

Can you merge the data? Okay. And there is actually a very interesting, very simple, um, very simple method to save, save the size of the data.

So instead of sending raw data you can set you can send their differences.

Right. So for example, if the if you're trying to send temperature and the temperature data can be in a wide range,

the first temperature is 20 and the second temperature is 21. The second data you're sending doesn't need to be 21.

It can be one. It can be a differential data to the previous one.

Then in that way you can actually reduce the size of data you're sending.

Okay. So there are a lot of ways that you can make, um, your operation more energy efficient.

Okay. The other design challenge and design consideration is how self, um, management can be achieved.

Okay. For a lot of embedded systems, um, it actually requires operation without human attention.

Okay. So I can give you a few examples. For example battlefield assessment.

You know this is actually happened, right? You know, you fly your fire, you fly an aeroplane, and you actually drop sensing devices,

for example, that you you want to detect landmine explosives.

Okay. So you can drop embedded devices by aeroplane. So you're not sending human troops to deploy the embedded device.

But then if you're doing like if you're doing things like that, you don't know when you're dropping the device from an aeroplane,

you don't know what is the orientation the device will be when it hits the ground.

Yeah. And you don't know the location of that device.

You couldn't even control how many surrounding neighbouring nodes.

Neighbouring devices are there when the device is actually on the ground.

Okay. Another example I can give you this also actually happened in reality is a volcanic monitoring.

You know, so scientists have deployed sensor network near volcanoes to detect whether there is any volcanic, um, you know, uh, actions.

Now, obviously, the reason that they're doing that is because they can't send humans directly into those sites.

their safety issues to send humans to deploy sensing device near the volcanic area.

So imagine this kind of scenario or for example, you know, forest monitoring, this kind of scenario.

You're not sending a human to deploy the embedded device. Actually the embedded devices are deployed in a random fashion, right?

So there are quite a few things that you need to think about if you're targeting that kind of application.

Even if you think about home automation, right, how you deploy a Wi-Fi network, that's also a black art, right?

Where are you? Where do you place the Wi-Fi network? Where do you need a repeater to make sure that the Wi-Fi covers the entire house?

It's actually not easily decided. Uh, so first of all, you know, I can give you a few examples.

This is definitely not an exhaustive list. How can the device know its location?

Okay, it's very, very soon people start realising if you are collecting sensing data without knowing the location.

The sensing data may not be that useful, right? If you are sensing temperature, right?

As a very simple example, you're trying to sense temperature, but you don't know where is the location of that temperature.

That that temperature is representing that. Then that temperature has always, you know.

All of a sudden that temperature is much less value, right? So can the device determine its own location?

Can the device determine what other devices are surrounding them?

Okay. Yesterday we covered two wireless topology, wireless network topology, one star network, one mesh network.

Right.

If you want to deploy a mesh network, that means there will be intermediate nodes to form the communication pathway for you to send the data out.

If you as a device, if the device doesn't even know how to reach its neighbouring nodes, there's no connection and you can't send the data out.

Okay, so can the device automatically find out who are my neighbours?

You know, assuming they are neighbours, right? And then how do I find a route?

How do I find the communication route? Right. If I want to send this device to my to to my central station.

Right. Whoever the scientist is collecting the data, how do I find out that route?

To go back to where the data should be collected. Okay.

And how do I initialise the data? How do I initialise the sensor?

Right. Like I said, sometimes when you when you deploy the sensing device of embedded device, the the orientation of that device might change.

Okay. So if you're, if you're sensing motion data, and the device is dropped and it's upside down and you don't know it.

Then when you receive the data, you're not seeing, the gravity is pointing up, right?

So there's actually a lot of on site calibration and the embedded device can do for you.

Okay. And then. There's another level of, uh, soft management which is more for handling failures.

Okay. Taking an example, uh, like the the connectivity example that I just mentioned.

Obviously the first step is for you to find out, okay, who are my neighbours?

But the problem is, is as you deploy those systems, the embedded systems, things will change.

Right. After one year, after two year after three years, things are changing.

Maybe one device will die first.

Because out of battery, out of power, right?

Because maybe that device is actually the most popular node that everyone, when they want to send the data out, they go through that device.

So that device dies first. Right.

Not all the device, even if you put if even if every device is designed in the exact same way and you put the same brand of battery,

every device will die at different time. Right. So you can never guarantee, you know all the device will die at the same time.

So the system stability, the system functionality stays with the weakest link.

Right. If one device died, every node tried to communicate through that device.

It's literally dead as well. Right. Because the data cannot come out.

If that's if that happened. Can a device know?

Okay. My upper layer is dead. I need to find another upper layer.

Right. So how automated a device can be to bring itself out from those failure situations.

That's also part of the self-management. Okay, so there are many different layers of self-management that you need to think about

when you're designing embedded systems according to application requirements.

Okay. This is this. This is application specific configuration right.

There's no right or wrong answer. It's all about application requirements.

And that's what I just asked. For example the sensor wireless sensor in forest.

And um how can we get the data. Should it, you know, communicate with the satellite then?

That's actually a very good question. Um, you put it in for the rest of the time.

Again, like I said, I use an example.

I, I have a lot of examples about forest monitoring because that's one of the, one of our key research area in New Zealand at least.

Yeah. But again, personally I don't think any of those solutions are silver bullets, right?

They all have their issues. Okay. Satellites.

You would imagine satellite would be a good, um. Would be a good approach.

Right? But very often, I don't know how many of you guys have used Starlink.

Anyone has experience with Starlink? It does actually require direct line of sight with the sky.

Okay. So you cannot use Starlink here. Right.

It needs a direct line of sight with the sky. You need the open sky so that the satellite can actually communicate with your receiver.

Yeah. It's actually not that easy to guarantee that in forest, you don't always get open sky in forest.

And the example I gave you yesterday that the device people placed on the tree actually got covered by the tree.

If that happens, that also won't work. Right. So how can you how can we get the signal from from it?

Um, so so first of all, obviously if you want to, If you want to ensure coverage, you want to find a very long distance communication.

Right. And then secondly, you need to deploy your own network.

Right. So your own base station with your own repeaters to extend your own network out,

because you need to do onsite measurement and making sure that, okay, at this location, at this spot, I can still get signal.

And the signal strength is very good,

but even that will guarantee the communication for a certain period of time because in forest trees grow things changes all the time.

Right. So it I at least I'm not aware of a 100%, you know, guaranteed communication network.

Forest monitoring is actually not that easy. You need to have a very good infrastructure deployment to make sure the connection is always on.

So using that we can set up our own station.

For example, in my factory, I can say technology wise, you can, whether you know whether that's legal or not, that's a different story.

Okay, okay. The technology exists. I'm not saying you can go to the forest and deploy.

Okay. That's definitely not what I'm saying. The technology is there.

We have the technology, but you're not necessarily allowed to deploy that in the forest.

Not like in our own factory. Can we have our own station?

That's up to you. Obviously. You know, if you own the factory, you can do whatever you want.

I have asked like a telecom in China. I said, oh, I want to do that.

He said, if I ask them to do it, it's very expensive. Okay. There's another legality issue okay.

But again you know, okay. We're really side tracking. Now this is not about embedded systems.

But I'm going to answer this question. You are you're not necessarily allowed to have a communication network that's licensed.

For example if a if a communication channel is already licensed, for example for cellular network, right.

That's used by mobile phone. And if you want to transmit in that channel, you need approval.

It's not that straightforward. Yeah. You there.

There's a lot of licensing steps that you need to do.

You know, governments will require you to pay before they certify your device can work in that frequency range.

But yeah, again, you know, that's case by case. That's the that's very very different.

Okay. Yeah. Any other questions.

How do we know like the life expectancy of like a certain controller in a forest and like I think like ADC sometimes like they drift.

So like they become less accurate over the time.

True. Yeah. So so so I.

I think that's a that's a very good question. And that's something you need to consider about your application.

Right. If you decide to use analogue sensor then you need to look at analogue sensor behaviour from the datasheet.

Right. If the analogue sensor performance varies according to temperature, and you deploy that in a forest,

that the temperature variation can go from -2 to 18 degree of the day,

then yeah, your sensor data can give you very different sensor sensing results depending on what time of the day you're doing that measurement.

Right. Um, can you get away with some digital sensor that's already factory calibrated and is more reliable towards different,

you know, within a certain temperature range? This is a design requirement. And this is exactly what when I say, you know,

there's actually a lot of application requirements that you need to consider when you're designing embedded systems.

Right. Every application has different requirements and we're facing that challenge, you know,

on a daily basis when we deal with different, different, you know, applications.

And and I'm not going to lie to you, this is a struggle that a lot of electronic and computer systems engineers are facing.

A lot of people come to us wanting something to be designed and we say, okay, this is going to take us, for example, five grand to design that device.

And people will ask us, well, if I can get a Raspberry Pi for $200 and put a sensor there and it works, why should I pay $5,000 to design a device?

And you know, our answer can only be, of course, you know, be my guest.

You know, you can put a Raspberry Pi into a forest and see if Raspberry Pi can survive after two weeks.

Right. And, you know, it's actually hard for a lot of users to appreciate, you know, embedded devices.

Actually not that easy to design. Right. But you guys are different.

You guys are engineers, right? I'm not expecting outside users to understand this, but you guys should.

Right. So you should know as an engineer that you're actually doing some very challenging stuff.

This is not something that everyone can do, right? And it's not this kind of system level thinking is not there for everyone.

You know, people usually will think, okay, you know, measuring temperature is easy.

You know, I just put the electronics and I put it in a box and I leave it there.

Yeah. Even measuring temperature is not that easy. But I can give you an example, depending on how the air conditioner is installed in this room.

If you measure the temperature there and if you measure the temperature there, it might be slightly different.

Right. When it's when it's industrial process a differ by one degree might be very different.

Right. You don't know. That's. You know, that's all the application requirements that you as an engineer, a as a designer need to think about.

Right. And trying to bring users to appreciate that is the challenge that you know they are facing.

Yeah. Okay. Cool.

So next challenge for wireless sensor networks deploying the communication.

Okay. There are many, many different wireless communication protocols.

Okay. Yesterday I mentioned a few okay Wi-Fi. Everyone knows glucose, right?

Zigbee. Uh, thread matter. Those are.

There are a lot of wireless communication protocols. Um, obvious.

Obviously, one of the most important things for wireless communication, first of all, is the communication range, right.

How far away can the two device be between the transmitter and receiver?

Right. For example, Wi-Fi typically can be, you know, 50 to 200m, depending on the physical environment.

Again, wireless communication is really a black art, right? That's why you're hearing such a wide range 50 to 200m.

If you put Wi-Fi out in an open space, it actually can go very far.

But if you put an indoor, that's a different story, right? With all the walls, metal cabinets that that will show the the electromagnetic wave,

all of a sudden, you know, the communication range becomes much smaller. Okay.

So there are all sorts of attenuation that will limit the communication range.

Now if your communication range is limited then how do you improve the coverage.

Then that's what I said earlier. The the multi hop Communication.

Sorry, I should have turned that on earlier. Come on.

Give it one second. So.

Oh, good. Um. Somehow I don't feel this is focussed.

It is not focussed. It's still not focussed.

Okay, let me try. Okay, so imagine this is device A, this is device B okay.

It's definitely not focussed. Okay.

That's great. Okay. And these two devices are out of range. Okay.

They cannot directly communicate with each other. So the easiest way is you have multi hop communication.

This is basically what WiFi IP network is doing. Okay. So you send your data to this.

And this relay node sends the data to this. And eventually it's reaching device B okay.

Obviously there needs to be a routeing protocol. Right. That's determining okay.

How where should I forward the data to to reach my final destination.

Right. So in IP network you have IP addresses. There will be, you know, helping routeing network to resolve where am I destinations.

Okay. Now routeing is not the focus of this course, right.

I just want to point out, you know, you can imagine if there is a direct communication, it will inevitably be faster, right?

Every segment of communication this device needs to receive,

and there needs to be a software process to process that device and decide, okay, which one is the next node that I forwarded on.

So there will be a processing overhead and the more hub.

So this is a single hub. The more hub you go through inevitably that will increase latency.

Okay. It does increase the coverage, right? Don't get me wrong, what I'm trying to tell you is there's always a trade off, right?

It gives you a longer distance coverage. So originally inside for example indoor, your WiFi can only cover 50m.

Now your Wi-Fi can cover 2.5km, right.

It will increase your coverage, but the latency will also slow.

You know, it will also make your communications slower. Right. So latency is one of the issues.

And every segment of communication is a potential failure, right.

If all of a sudden this link failed because someone is moving a metal shelf and the communication between these two devices are blocked.

All the previous communications might be wasted. Okay,

so multi hub also means that potentially you're having higher likelihood of failure

because you have more segments than you need to guarantee that X is actually working.

And this kind of um communication is also tricky in a way that wireless communication is um it's not directly, um, obvious.

But if you if you think about if you think about a wired network like Ethernet.

Only one device can send data out at one time.

Right. The same thing is almost the same with wireless network.

If they're in range. Right? If these two are in. Are not in range.

Obviously they can communicate. They can transmit at the same time.

But if these two devices are actually in range with each other, only one device can can transmit.

Otherwise, your data packet will collide in the air.

Right. The electromagnetic waves will collide in the air. Okay. So there are a lot of different ways to solve this collision.

Because if collision happens, the data will be corrupted. Nothing will be received.

Okay. So there are two common ways of solving this issue.

Um, I'm not going into the detail because this is something that should be covered by a network paper.

But you know, as an embedded designer, you should have a basic understanding.

So there are two potential ways. One is called contention based.

One is called contention free. There are two categories. Okay.

So. Contention.

Based. Did anyone have any one of you heard?

Uh, csma CA. That's one of the techniques used by, uh, Wi-Fi.

So it's called career sense. Multiple access with collision avoidance.

Okay, so what does career sense mean?

Career sense means all the devices want to transmit will listen to the wireless channel before they transmit.

They'll try to listen to that channel if the channel is quiet, that's more likelihood that no one is transmitting.

Okay. That's what career sense means. They will try to listen to the channel first, making sure the channel is quiet.

Okay. And the multiple access means. Okay. Multiple device can access the channel.

Okay. Even though there's career sense, collision might still happen, right?

You can never guarantee two devices distributed independently.

They can still send at the same time, right? They post listing at the same time.

Thinking the channel is quiet and then they both transmit at the same time.

Okay. Career sense can only, uh, prevent collision to some extent.

Okay. But of course, if when the device listened to the channel and someone is transmitting, then there will be a backoff timer.

It will try to, you know, time itself for a certain period of time.

And then after that timer, it will start transmit, and it will start listening again and start trying to start transmitting again.

Okay. And collision avoidance is, you know, if collision did happen, then again there will be a timer.

There will be a retransmission time. Right.

If the collision has been detected, then it will try to wait for a certain amount of time and then try to reset the packet.

Okay. But again, as you can imagine, if you are rescinding the packet.

First of all, it wastes a lot of time. You already transmitted once.

It didn't succeed. And second of all, it waste power, right?

For one data, you actually waste twice the amount of power to send that data out.

Okay. But so this is contention based, meaning that the protocol itself allows for competition.

Right. The protocol is one that divides to compete for the wireless channel for transmission.

Okay. That's one typical uh, uh, category of uh, protocols.

It's usually used for commercial, uh, consumer applications like Wi-Fi.

When communication latency doesn't need to be guaranteed.

Right. So, you know, for example, if you're doing video streaming okay, you know, it would be nice to see a smooth video, but once in a while.

If the video glitches, it's not the end of the world, right?

It doesn't kill anyone. Okay, so you don't need to guarantee, okay, that video data needs to be there within a certain time.

It cannot be guaranteed. Okay. Now another type of method called contention free.

Okay. So this type of method does not allow contention. It doesn't want devices to compete with each other.

There are different ways of doing that. The simplest way is called TDMA.

Okay. Time division multiple access. So basically it provides duty cycles.

Okay. So you assume it assumes if this is the timeline this is my cycle okay.

If my network has five devices I'll break down the time into five periods.

Every device gets its own period. Okay.

You can only transmit within the given the allocated time period.

Outside that time period, you have to sleep. You're not allowed to talk.

Right. And in order to do that, every device needs to be synchronised.

Right. Because if you're not synchronising time, this device hasn't finished.

And you think, oh, I'm starting already. Then collision will again happen.

Okay. So for TDMA, uh, devices need to be highly synchronised.

Okay. Another, uh, method for contention is DMA frequency division multiple access.

Then you're dividing the channel into multiple frequency sub frequency channels.

So everyone is using slightly different frequency channels that will also allow multiple access.

But as you can imagine TDMA contention free has larger limitation.

For example, in terms of how many devices you can support at one time. right?

The more device you need to support, the longer this entire cycle is.

Because, for example, this device after sending it, needs to wait until every other device finished and then it can start transmitting again.

So the more device you have, the shorter the period you can send and the longer you need to wait.

Right. So there's got to be a physical limit of you know, how long your application can accept.

Okay. But if your if your um, if your application for example,

a lot of industrial networks linking the PLCs, the only sending very simple sensor data, right.

Every device just needs for example, 30 milliseconds.

And they need absolute guarantee about timing.

Right. Every three seconds I need to receive a temperature sensor data.

Then this type of network might be more useful. Okay.

Again. Design compromise. Okay.

It's all to do with application requirements. Okay.

And then another issue about network architecture is do you want to do the management in a centralised or decentralised way.

Okay. Centralised is definitely useful right.

If your system architecture if your network architecture is not big.

Right. Say you only have ten devices and one central device can actually see all the other devices.

Then if that device can do centralised decision, that decision is a globally optimised decision, right.

Because it can receive all the data. Right.

It can see which device is busier, which device is less busy.

You know, it can actually you know, they can be algorithms designing the central device to optimise the entire Operation.

But again, the reason why people move away from centralised management is because it's usually physically impossible.

Usually your deployment will be much bigger, so there's no single device that will have a global view of your entire system, right?

Which means every individual device need to make certain decisions based on its limited local view.

And this is also what happens with IP network with internet, right?

If you have devices that extends to the entire Earth, there's no way you can have a centralised decision.

You know, most likely you will have a hierarchical, decentralised decision making.

So I'm using routeing as an example. Right.

If you have a centralised system, routeing will be a lot easier, right.

Because there will be one device deciding how this device connects to another device.

All right. This can be a lot more efficient. Okay.

But that's provided that one central divide. There's the existence of that central device.

Need to be there. Right. If there's no device that have the global knowledge, this is not achievable.

And you cannot achieve a centralised decision. So this is also something that's um, that's very important when you're designing embedded system.

Obviously according to your application requirement you want to make your system as simple as possible.

Right. The simpler the system is, the more reliable it will be.

That's usually the case. Okay.

Some other design constraints. Um, when you're, you know, in addition to energy communication, self-management,

there's a lot of other design constraints that you need to think about, right? How much processing power do you need?

Okay. Every, you know, microcontroller has limited computational power.

How much storage capability do you need? Right.

As I mentioned yesterday. Storage is actually one of the biggest constraints for embedded device, right?

Having a large amount of storage is expensive and also power hungry.

Okay. Memory components are actually very power hungry.

And the more memory access you're doing with more energy.

And the other thing that a lot of people usually don't think about is the number of Io's general purpose io, right.

The smaller you want the chip. Right.

Usually a chip, a microcontroller dies like this, right?

You have those small pins. Okay.

Does that make sense? This drawing? Yeah. The smaller you want your device to be, the fewer number of IO pins you will have available.

Okay, this is one of the main reasons why a lot of computing systems, not only embedded systems, are moving away from parallel buses.

Right? In the old days. Peripheral bus are usually parallel buses.

Right? You know, at the same time, you can send one byte of data with eight wires.

Okay. For electrical engineers or the electronics engineers, you probably get more and more feeling about that.

Eight wires. That means on PCP you need to have eight wires to route.

That is just one bus, right? Imagine if you have multiple components.

Routeing a bus is a it's it's a it's a nightmare right.

You want to save the the wiring as much as you can. Right.

That's why for a lot of embedded devices, um, people are moving away from parallel buses and going to serial buses.

One of the most famous ones is USB, right? Universal Serial bus.

And for embedded systems, actually, USB is not that common because USB protocol is actually quite, uh, heavy.

Um, I'm sure all of you heard about. You are right.

That's one of the first, uh, serial bus that you've come across, right?

Only 3 to 4 wires, and you can keep sending as many data as you want.

Okay. So I o components is also a big issue.

Right. And also if you want to add more sensors, every sensor will occupy certain I o buses I o pins.

Right. Either you're using analogue sensors, then you need to use the ADC pin,

or if you're using digital sensors then it will be on one of the peripheral bus Either spy you are the eye to see or similar things like that,

which I'll give you an example later on. So, so that's one of the things that you think about.

And also bearing my, uh, for embedded systems, very often it doesn't allow you, it doesn't support that level of software complexity.

Some of the microcontrollers can't even do a floating point computation, right.

Some some microcontrollers doesn't support multi-threading. Okay.

So so, you know, there are different levels of microcontrollers that you can actually select depending on your application requirements.

Okay. Again security. This is becoming a more, uh, increasingly, increasingly important topic.

Um, because now there's more and more devices are measuring critical data.

Okay. So for example, your wearable device measuring your vital signs.

You probably don't want other people to be able to know your blood pressure. A body temperature.

A lot of things can be inferred by those data. Right. Uh, and for example, you know, smart grid power system.

Uh, sensor network. You probably don't want other people to be to be able to.

To be able to tap into a power system control network.

Right. Then that means people can actually bring down your power plant.

Um, which also happens. Um, but, but but security is becoming more and more important.

Right. And, and and as a designer, you just need to bear in mind.

There's always a cost. There's always an overhead. Depending on the level of security you want to incorporate.

Whether it's, you know, encryption, software authentication.

All the security measures will have some overhead towards embedded systems design.

Okay. Okay. Any questions so far.

Again, you know, like I said, you can, you know, relax.

You know, feel like you're just listening to a story, right? I'm not examining you.

You know, you don't need to memorise this, but I just want to show you this is actually a system level thinking, right?

Every element in your design will interfere with each other.

Okay. Cool.

Oh, gosh. Okay. Um, it's already 352.

Okay, I'll. I'll. I have a few more slides. Just bear with me.

We have two hours anyway, so I probably wouldn't give you a break, but, you know, you can probably leave, like, you know, 40 minutes earlier.

So cool. Um, so I just want to run you through, uh, um, the node architecture for embedded device.

Okay. Just about all embedded devices are having those sub subcomponents, so so so so this is actually pretty common for embedded systems.

Okay. So for embedded systems most likely you will have these four subsystems okay.

Sensing processing communication and power right.

These are these are you know the four subsystems that you know you can probably find almost all embedded systems.

Right. Safely speaking. Okay. So this is a this is a very common, um block diagram.

Okay. So you have the processor subsystem, the processors, you it can be a microprocessor.

It can be a microcontroller okay. And you have the sensor subsystem.

Again the sensor subsystems can either be analogue or digital.

Right. If it's an analogue sensor it needs to go through ADC okay.

It can go through ADC before or after the ADC can be on the processor subsystem or on the sensor subsystem.

Sometimes the ADC will also give you peripheral bus connectivity, then it can be on the sensor side.

Okay. Of course the easiest way is for is to use a digital sensor.

Then the digital sensor will incorporate peripheral bus directly as part of the sensor.

Right. So now there's more and more you know digital sensors are becoming more and more common.

You know, you don't necessarily need to use analogue sensors. And then there's a communication subsystem.

Okay. Usually there is a network network processor. Sometimes the communication subsystems can also be embedded in the processor subsystems nowadays.

So that the the communication system is also part of that processor.

Okay. It's doable. But if you zoom out there's still a processor and a communication network processor.

Okay. What's not what's usually not there is the actual Physical radio part the antenna.

Right? It's very unlikely that you can have the antenna as part of the chip.

It can be done especially with Bluetooth, but but mostly antennas.

They are outside. So that because the antenna design actually determines how how long, how far he can reach.

Right. The smaller the antenna, the shorter the distance. Okay.

So usually antenna still, um, external.

Okay. What's not shown here is the power. Okay. Power is usually less relevant to the operational side of things, but power systems differently there.

You in any case, need a power subsystem to, uh, support the operation of all the elements, right?

For communication, for processing and for sensing. And it's not unlikely that different parts have different power management system.

Right. Maybe the sensor will need a different Voltage compared to the processor itself.

Okay, so power system itself can be a challenge to design in a block diagram.

Why do we have like accelerator like right next to ADC in the sensor subsystem but also like accelerometers.

Yeah. Accelerate accelerometers accelerometer accelerator.

Yeah okay okay. Yeah. So it's a sensor measuring acceleration.

Yeah. It's not like digital acceleration. No no not like DSP or FPGA.

Yeah yeah yeah. No I mean if if it's an accelerator it's usually part of this.

So the processor subsystem again it can be very complicated in old days especially in the old days when the computational power is a problem.

It's very common that you have a coprocessor here, right.

It doesn't need to be just one processor. You can have a power efficient mem processor and you can have a, you know,

more powerful code processor to handle all the computationally intensive process.

Pico and Mico like Intel. Intel does that.

I'm going to show you an example. Intel. Intel was very famous about doing that.

Um, you know, they usually have a DSP, uh, uh, core processor.

Uh, and it's very likely that people can have an FPGA co-processor so that, you know,

it becomes a reprogramme, you know, with programmable, uh, embedded device.

Um, but if you are aiming for power efficiency, then, you know, core processors definitely allow more power hungry.

Okay. Yeah. I won't go through a lot of details for the next few slides.

I just want to show you how many sensors you know Available is available.

And this is not even like, you know, like 10% of the sensors that, you know, embedded systems engineer might need to deal with.

Um, but but yeah, we do have a lot of different sensors. And in this project, in the project that you will be doing, you will be using accelerometer.

Okay. Uh, a sensor that's measuring acceleration. Okay.

Because we want to detect steps. Okay. So acceleration is one of the best ways to measure vibration.

Or if you double integrate acceleration you will get distance right.

So measuring step or measuring physical movement distance acceleration.

Accelerometer is a very common sensor to use and it's actually available in all mobile phones right.

That's actually how, you know, accelerometer gyroscope is actually how they actually sense the mobile phone orientation.

Okay. Um, the second sensor that you will be using is, uh, magnetometer, magnetic sensor.

Okay. So the magnetometer will allow you to determine the absolute orientation of your device.

Okay. My next lecture, I will show you why it is so important to know the orientation, not just the steps.

Right. Orientation actually means a lot when you want to know, uh, the device's location.

Okay, so these are the two, uh, sensors that you will be using in, uh, project two.

Okay. So processor subsystems. Um, so everyone here knows the difference between microprocessor and microcontroller.

That's from part two. Yeah, yeah. 20292012 and I will repeat that.

But that fundamental knowledge is from 201. Yeah. What's the difference between microprocessor and microcontroller?

Well, I'm more peripheral one guy. Like, maybe like GPU.

And then depending on the application like system on chip is like very complicated.

So microcontroller is just a processor a microprocessor is just a processor.

Okay. That's the fundamental difference. Microprocessor is just a CPU core.

Okay. Microprocessor doesn't have much of other peripherals. Right.

Whereas microcontroller is an integrated system. Microcontroller will have Ram.

It can have non-volatile memory like flash in it.

It will be able to support different peripheral serial buses with microprocessor.

Doesn't do that. Okay. So microcontroller is more commonly used in embedded systems.

If you use a microprocessor then you need to have a lot of other chips, other chipsets to actually support other peripheral operations.

So if you talk about, for example, an actual desktop computer, you know.

Apart from the CPU, there are other chipsets actually, that's on the motherboard.

That's handling all the other peripherals. Right. For example supporting.

PCI express and all that kind of, uh, you know, external devices.

But microcontroller, everything is integrated. As much as it can.

Okay. So usually microcontrollers are much smaller and they're much more power efficient.

Okay. So smaller size power efficiency and cheaper.

Okay. Microcontrollers are inevitably without doubt, cheaper.

But obviously their computational power is, you know, not as fast as microprocessor.

Okay. And they will have different memory limitations.

Right. Because for microprocessor you can decide you know, you can add external memories.

You can you can expand your memory size as much as possible. But microcontroller.

Usually the memory size comes with the chip.

If you decide to buy that micro microcontroller, that is the memory size you're going to get, you can't change that anymore.

Okay. Um, and communication interface, this communication interface I mentioned in here.

Now the wireless communication is the zero bus. Is the peripheral bus within the microcontroller.

Okay. Now the most common serial interface obviously Uart.

You know, I hope most people heard about that. Uh, and then the second most common is, uh, zero peripheral interface SPI.

So SPI bus is also a very common serial bus interface.

And the third most common is I see inter integrated circuit.

Okay. All these three serial buses have its pros and cons.

Okay. You are everyone used that probably in very early, you know, design courses.

You are a serial bus. All the data goes on.

Two copper wires. Okay. You can you can transmit, you can receive.

Right. And you can transmit and receive at the same time. So it's full duplex.

You can send and receive at the same time. The limitation of Uart is it's a point to point network.

Okay. If you're just connecting one device to another device you are very good, right?

But if you want to connect multiple devices together, then you cannot do that.

Okay. Uh, SBI is the next most common one.

Okay. Among the three, you are IUCN, SPI. SPI is the fastest serial bus.

Okay. So if you want to have if you want to support another subsystem that requires faster speed, for example.

The communication system. Okay.

You want to ensure that the communication between the communication subsystem and the processor subsystem is fast enough.

Then most likely you will choose SP. You won't. You won't choose Uart, right?

Because you want to ensure that wireless communication will be handled smoothly.

Right. You are has a speed limitation. But the challenge the limitation of SPI while SPI allows multiple devices.

This is the typical SPI configuration. Okay so it has a clock pin.

So master and slave are actually synchronised. They share one clock.

Uart doesn't share a clock. You are asynchronous. Okay. And then it has master out slave in mostly and master in slave out.

found myself. So a transmitter and receiver. Okay, so it's also full duplex.

It can send and it can receive at the same time. But the difference is it has this, um, additional pin called chip select.

Okay. The master will decide when I want to activate the communication with a with a specific slave.

Right. Only when the chip select signal is activated then you can use this communication lines.

Okay. So at any point in time you're still doing point to point communication. But SPF does allow you to support multiple devices okay.

At a very fast speed. Now of course the limitation is this chip.

Select every additional device you need to have an extra pin okay.

But it does allow you to submit to to um to support multiple devices.

Now SPI will be the zero bus that you will be using in project two.

You don't need to know this level of detail. Okay. The good and the bad nowadays is embedded.

Engineer. You you don't need to know a lot of lower level details because, for example, STM,

the company have already provided a lot of very well developed libraries like the the device drivers.

Right. So the device driver is always there,

but using the device driver to access the sensor to get the sensor data and to understand what the sensor data actually means, is your job.

Okay. So this is what you need to do as the first step of your project tool.

Okay. Once we give you the once we give you the, um, the device, uh, very soon you need to start reading the datasheet.

You need to understand how the sensors are operating. How does the sensors record its own data?

How do you access sensor data using the given SPI bus?

Convert the sensor data into the right interpretable value.

Right. That will be your acceleration, right?

Based on that acceleration. Then next stage you can work on a step detection algorithm.

Okay. Now for completeness I see the difference between iSCSI and SPI is that I see is a dropping bus.

You don't have chips or that all the devices are sharing the same, um, the same computation bus.

Okay, so if you want to connect to a lot of devices, but you don't want to use extra pins, I see is the way to go, but it is slower, right?

SPI allows you to communicate at a faster speed. Okay, so I just want the last few slides here with me.

Um, just want to show you some examples. This is one of the early wireless sensor node okay.

And it's actually a very rare sensor node.

It was designed with Intel processors. That's a very early stage Intel processor X scale.

Maybe many of you didn't even heard. I have never heard of this, uh, Intel processor.

Uh, the fancy part about X scale CPU is that it can actually change its operating frequency.

So if you want more processing power, you can, you know, increase the processing clock frequency.

So you can actually process a lot more data.

But if you want to consume less power, you can actually reduce your frequency to consume less, uh, less power.

Um, but interestingly, this, uh, sensor node also has a digital signal processor.

It has a DSP designed to process those, you know, high demand sensor data.

Okay. So this is the processing subsystem. And you see there's also a communication subsystem.

It's always there. Right. And it has the uh so this so this is actually a microprocessor right.

So that's why it doesn't have any of the memory that it needs additional memories.

And there is a power system power management subsystem. And this IO is actually the sensing subsystem that we're referring to.

So this IO supports SPI Uart uh and it doesn't have I super see here but it has I squared s.

That's a variant right. So this peripheral bus, this interface system allows researchers to connect to different types of sensors.

Okay. So just about all embedded systems will have those subsystems, uh, just for any type of applications.

Okay. So see this main processor, the x cal CPU.

It actually allows you to do dynamic voltage scaling so that you can control the the clock frequency and also the power consumption.

Can you vary the voltage and do DFS like dynamic voltage.

I don't know about this processor though. Maybe not this processor because this process is very old.

Uh, Intel started doing this, you know, in, in, in a lot of their later stage processor as well.

Um, but yeah, I'm not sure whether they're still doing that now.

Yeah. Cool. Um, and I just want to show you a different variant.

Okay. So this is the sensor node that we design in-house, uh, in Auckland Uni.

So what you can see is it's still the same thing right here.

Uh, instead of using a microprocessor. We're having a microcontroller here and a micro.

In addition to the microcontroller, we also have the the communication part.

Okay. Here you can see this is the antenna a very small antenna.

Okay. And then you also have the sensing system. So here we have the accelerometer.

And magnetometer. This specific device is designed as wearable devices.

So we're really trying to make it very small.

Um but even that we still have an interface, you know, to expose the zero buses in case if you want to connect more additional sensors.

But, uh, the processor, the communication, um, and there is a power here.

And then the sensing part, it's always there. Right? For embedded systems, there's always the subsystems.

Okay. Oh, wow. That's my last slide. Cool.

Um. I, I'm hesitating whether I should continue on.

Okay. Maybe now, if I continue on, maybe I could give you a break. Uh, I won't continue on to the next, uh, like, set of lecture slides.

I will, I will resume next Wednesday. Okay. Okay, cool.

Thank you very much. And I'll see you next Wednesday. Okay.

Thank you. Okay. Thank you.

