[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Is going to go and you put that into the council. They charge you a lot of money and then they'll process that,

and they might ask questions if they're not happy about something and say, well, what about this?

What about that? You respond to those and then hopefully they'll give you a consent.

So did you see the organic vineyards have a higher, uh, risk of.

No no no no neither neither.

But with their organic or not, they're still going to have hydraulic loading and body loading in that effluent.

So it doesn't matter if they're clinical or normal or non-organic.

You're always going to have those two factors that are um, you've got to treat and you don't want getting into the surface water.

So every winter when we're or a winery or vineyard has to, uh, get through the council.

Yes. Yep. Um, unless or unless you're discharging to a sewer, in which case it'll be the, um.

It won't be the. It'll be whoever's looking after the wastewater treatment. Yeah, you still have to.

You've got to apply for it. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. Always. You're not allowed to do anything without a consent.

You'll learn that. Yeah. That's right. Thanks a lot.

Thanks, team. Yeah. Good questions. Thank you. I hope you learned something.

Yeah, it is a bit of a rush. It'll make sense. Even more sense when we get down south.

So. Yeah. I'm gonna have a good cause.

I think you got a good teacher. Yeah. Jason J.

Yeah. He's a good man. Yeah, they got no option to say that. Well, you standing here, so they had to say that.

That's right. Yeah. That's a pass. Yeah. Um.

Or initially, just in case. I'm sure there's an icon here that says lecture theatre recording.

That's what you click on to start with. All right, so, um, I'll see you, uh, on Friday for the, um.

Uh, but guess what? Oh, I also have a question for you regarding the new the, um, the assignment, Jim, the compliance one.

Oh, yeah. We got the email with the information.

Information. And that is usually like, obviously that's information that we use.

Can we outsource as well? Sure. But it's like mainly a summary because.

Yeah. Because that's the information the industry work on okay. So it's like a summary of that information.

Yeah. That's kind of what a compliance. Yeah I mean I wouldn't start expanding it out of that.

It's really about it being able to explain that and understand it. Okay.

Yeah. So we're just providing like an explanation for like the other three people to understand what are.

Yeah, assigning the key things and the implications and and and be able to answer questions.

Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Thank you. Yeah. I'll walk out with.

Oh thanks for Because I'll get lost. Yeah, I can get out of it. Thank you.

Oh! My God.

Yeah. What?

Do you get here? I can't.

Tell you. Can you tell me?

No need any more. It's two people.

Yeah, I think it's good.

I mean. I really want.

To. Yeah.

Bird groups will protect you. Yeah, I'm. Sorry.

Say that again. The groups in canvas aren't showing up for public.

Two. Really? Yeah.

Yeah. Oh.

That's weird. Can you can you go to, um.

Can you go to, uh, groups to show people to show me?

Project one groups. And then those two groups addressing some people.

Yeah, yeah. No, no projector too. Oh.

That's weird. I wouldn't make it visible. I don't know what else I need to do.

That's bizarre. Okay, thanks for letting me know.

I will try to figure out what, um, what has happened.

That doesn't make any sense. Oh, that's.

That is really weird. And I just literally see someone created themselves, uh, a group tap, um, in Chinese because they can't find the projector, too.

We have to. Yeah. No, I think this is just a this is just a test because the the group name in the group name in that thing called six, six, six six.

Yeah. Maybe something, maybe something seriously wrong.

I don't know, I think this is something I need to contact the canvas group because you can see group project one.

Yeah, yeah, but you can't see project two. I don't know why.

I. Took two blocks away.

And I can't even delete that. I cannot delete it.

I can't delete that. That.

That is. That is bizarre.

Can you try again? Can you just refresh the page and see if it's. Yeah.

Still nothing. Okay. That is.

That is just weird. Oh, wait. Hold on.

Wait wait wait. I think, I know, I think I might, I might know why.

Can you try again? There is a one group, right?

Okay. Yeah. So I know, I start knowing why. So I need to create all the subgroup names.

So I need to create group, not group one. Group two, group three for the group set to be visible.

Okay. Yeah. That will be done after the, uh, after the lecture. Yeah.

Cool. Thanks for letting me know. Okay.

Um, let's get started. Um, so is this usually how many students attending lectures?

Probably roughly. Okay. All right. Um, again.

Um, you guys already know me. Um, so, um, you also know that I don't like giving a lot of lectures, so my lecture will be very brief.

Um, and you guys also need.

I mean, we're mindful about your workload in the second half of the second semester, right?

So this is already week seven. Okay. So just to give just to give you a run through of how the rest of the course will work.

Uh, my part is basically another project. Yeah.

So I'm going to hand out a project this week, and I will hand out the kit to the project groups next Monday's lab.

Okay. So please make sure that you come to next Monday's lab to get your kit.

Um. And Monday and Tuesday will be a get started lab to help you to learn how to use that kit.

So it's basically arm based embedded kit that we design in-house.

Um, and the project is actually doing a human step detection device.

So you need to design a step detection device using the kit that will give you.

And at the end of the project demo in week 12, uh, Tuesday,

you need to show us that you can actually detect the steps and track the human orientation using that device.

Uh, the reason I don't give you a lot of lectures in my part of the course is because this part is really tight.

You literally don't have a lot of a lot of time left. Right. Think about that.

Week A is the getting started lab week. Now you're going to be in Systems week.

Most of you not you. You're going to be in Systems week when you come back.

In week ten, we're going to have the internet interview, right? The internet interview.

We want to make sure that you can actually read the sensor value from the from the device.

Right. If you can't even read the censor value, forget about step detection, step detection, orientation detection.

The second step you need to detect. You need to be able to read the sensor value from accelerometer and magnetometer.

Right? So that's what the interview is going to be. That's already week ten, right?

Wiki 11. You have another lab session by that week.

We're hoping that you start implementing the step detection algorithm and orientation orientation detection algorithm.

And week 12 you're going to do the demo right.

Even without a lot of lectures I think this is already fast enough pace.

Right. And we for the intro interview we also asked you to do some literature review.

Okay. So you see in the project brief, I'm only asking you to read, like 3 to 4 papers.

I'm not asking you to read 30 or 40 papers. Okay. I want you to read those papers.

Know how the step detection can be done, how the orientation detection can be done so that, you know, to prepare you for your final implementation.

Okay. So that's roughly what it is. So it's already quite tight.

Um, um, my lectures because again, this course doesn't have, um, exams.

Right. So my lectures are mostly, you know, relax.

You know, listen for the information. Right. This information should be useful for your future career.

And you can try to make use of the this knowledge in your project design as well.

Okay. But again, you know, don't worry about memorising things at your stage.

It's more about the concept, right? You're already part four. You know in two months time you know you're going to start.

You might start working in a company. So you know, it's not about, you know.

Memorisation is not our focus now. Right. So, um, I choose, uh, wireless sensor network as my, um, as my lecture context.

Okay. Um, keep in mind, one of the main reasons why we want embedded systems is for mobility.

Right. The reason why we want to make things smaller and smaller is so that it doesn't need to be tied to a certain location, like a desktop computer.

Right. And and then, you know, as you will see in my lecture trays, once device start becoming small and mobile very soon,

people start realising, yeah, if the device are not interconnected, a stand alone mobile device, it's not that useful.

Right. Just imagine you know your mobile phone, right? It's tiny, you know, it has a lot of computational power, but it has no network.

Right. Then, you know, all of a sudden, all the functionality stock cut in half.

Right? So as soon as people you know can design things in a smaller fashion, they start realising, oh, actually, interconnectivity is also important.

Otherwise a lot of functionality cannot be implemented. So embedded systems and wireless communication very often go side by side.

Nowadays, it's very, very unlikely that you see an embedded system that has absolutely no wireless connection, right?

All of a sudden all its functionality is gone. Okay.

So this is why I choose wireless sensor network as a as my lecture context, because it kind of shows you the,

the, the system level thinking and the design challenge that you need to keep in mind for embedded systems.

And that has wireless connectivity.

Okay. But before I start that, I want to introduce some concept called ubiquitous computing.

Have you heard this concept before? No. Okay, so ubiquitous computing is.

It's what we consider as the third wave computing. Okay.

The first wave of computing is mainframe. Okay. So for people who know me, knows that I'm a big fan of computing history.

Right. And and we're not talking very long time ago.

Right. We're talking about 1960s and 1970s. Right.

When when the size of a computer is basically larger than the size of this, uh, lecture theatre.

Right. So that's mainframe computer. Uh, you rarely see it.

Right. Mainframe computer doesn't tie to any individuals. Right.

You submit your tasks to a terminal, almost like cloud computing.

Now you submit your task or cluster computing. You submit your task to a terminal, and hopefully the task will be done in a queue, you know, in time.

And then in the early 1980s, you know, personal computers start showing up.

Right. The concept is okay now everyone owns its, you know, their own computer.

Right. That device is tied to them, right? You can personalise the software.

You can customise the software. You can customise the you the user interface.

The machine is yours, right? Doesn't belong to anyone else. But at that you know not not not far.

You know not you know, very far after the personal computer becomes available.

This person, Mark Weiser, he's actually the research director of a research institute called Xerox Parc.

Xerox Parc in the 1980s is like the Google nowadays, right?

It's actually the top research facility in California.

And this guy actually proposed an idea called ubiquitous computing, meaning that, okay, forget about personal computer.

In future, the entity of the computer will disappear.

Okay. Computers will start embedding into the physical environment.

That's what ubiquitous mean. And for personal users, you don't actually see the computer you interact with its service.

Okay. So actually this concept is what's driven a lot of the technology development for the, you know,

the following, you know, 30 years up till now, he proposed the idea in 1989, almost early 90s.

Um, and and originating from that, a lot of follow up concept was actually proposed, for example, internet of things.

Okay.

Because again, people start realising, okay, if I have, you know, computers embedded in the environment, there must be some interconnectivity, right?

The device itself is forming like an internet. Okay.

So internet of things initially was proposed to ensure that there is an interconnectivity.

For extremely large scale system write systems with thousands or tens of thousands of devices.

And then wireless sensor network is one of the core technologies for ubiquitous computing.

Okay. And and and you wouldn't believe how fast the technology has developed in the last 50, 40, 50 years, right?

Um, when microprocessor chip first become available, you know, people are still working on computer architecture.

You know, Intel probably doesn't even exist at that time.

And one of the, one of the, uh, the researchers were proposing a tiny processor, and his claim was that.

And that claim got left in the conference.

No other researcher believed in him at that time. He thinks that there will be billions of those microchips in 20 years.

And then. And then it was recorded. It was recorded at that time.

You know, one of the professors attacked him with that claim.

So basically, what he's saying is every doorknob in the household will have a microchip in it.

And that that researcher actually says, yeah, that's that's what I expect. No one believed him.

No one believing him at that time. Now you're looking.

You're going to a hotel. You know, every doorknob is car accessed.

Every doorknob has a microchip in it. Right. So that guy's expectation actually become true.

So the technology has actually advanced beyond a lot of people's expectation in, in, in, you know, and since then,

the concept of ubiquitous computing or Internet of Things are actually borrowed and renamed in different research domains.

Okay, so there are internet of vehicles. Okay. Nowadays with EVs, vehicles can be interconnected.

You know, self-driving cars can be interconnected. They're precision agriculture, right?

You have agriculture. You have sensors interconnected, sensing temperature, humidity, how fast the plant can grow.

Um, their industry 4.0. Right. All the PLCs, you know, program, programmable logic unit, uh, are interconnected by industrial networks.

Okay. So the same concept has migrated to different domains, you know, smart grid for power systems.

All the power controllers, all the micro station substations are interconnected.

So the same concept actually propagates through two different research domains already.

Okay. And as a general, um, ecosystem, uh, now that we are getting more and more complicated distributed system, we start putting layers, right?

You know, humans need to find a way to partition the system so that it's more digestible.

So, you know, the most straightforward things is to make things hierarchical, right?

Okay. So in the beginning, people start working on cloud computing.

Right. Try to centralise things. Right.

To create a very big data centre. Very powerful. You can submit your your data to it.

You don't need to you don't need to manage your own device. Right.

Cloud and data centre will manage the device for you. All you need to do is just create a virtual machine and run your application there.

Okay. It's it's very good for certain applications, you know, like web servers.

You know, how many small companies actually want to host their own web server and do all that maintenance?

It's a burden, right?

So initially, uh, that's the first piece of, um, puzzle that people start creating, you know, to establish the interconnectivity.

And then people start realising, oh, um, if we actually want to do everything in the cloud, the cloud will be overwhelmed.

Okay, that's one thing. And if we want to actually transmit all the data to the cloud, the communication network will will be overwhelmed.

Right. And also, uh, if all the data need to go to the cloud, do the processing and get the decision back,

that latency will kill off all the local services because it's too slow.

Right. So it will kill off the local applications.

So then people start realising, oh, actually, you know, computation, maybe we shouldn't do all the computation in the cloud.

Maybe that's not the most efficient way to to do things.

So people start thinking about, okay, how can we do computation closer to the edge of the network, closer to the end user?

Right. So then there are two new concepts developed.

One of them is edge computing. Right. You're literally doing computing at the edge of the network.

Uh, very resource limiting hardware, you know?

True. Embedded systems most likely has computational constraint memory, you know, data storage constraint and power constraint okay.

But because that device is at the edge of the network, it's with the end user, it will inevitably has the fastest response time.

Right.

Because well, I mean if you do the processing locally and directly respond, you save all the uncertainty and latency for the communication, right?

Nothing. Well, I mean, unless the device broke, very little thing can go wrong Or as a compromise between the cloud and the edge.

That's the fog area. Okay. That's during the relay node.

During the routeing node. You can do computation there.

Okay. So there's also a concept called for computing. Right.

Again all very similar concept but has a slightly different context.

Okay. Oh and if you want to know anything more.

Feel free to just ask questions. Right.

So wireless sensor networks um, basically multiple devices, multiple sensing devices interconnected to form a network.

And they work cooperatively very often.

A wireless network is perceived as a whole, right? Perceived as a single thing.

Um, you know, very few cases, very few occasions, um, the users will consider and trying to connect individual sensors directly.

You know, it's usually there's usually a unified interface that integrates.

Wireless sensor network as a single system for external users.

Now, it was not always. Wirelessly connected.

Okay. This is something that I want to that I want to show you. Again, like I said, I'm a big fan of histories.

Um, this is this big enough, right?

So you wouldn't believe, you know, um, researchers start working on, you know, embedded.

Small electronics, microelectronics. Uh, since a very long time ago.

Right. So the first sensing device, a distributed sensing device.

And the reason why. I specifically call this distributed sensor network is because that sensor network is not wireless.

That was one of the very few early stage sensor networks that's not wireless.

Okay. And it's done by military. So you can imagine the reason they can do it is because they have a lot of money.

You can imagine, you know, if you want to have a distributed sensor network that goes,

I don't need to make it far, just a few hundred metres with 5000 nodes.

You can you should try and imagine how many wiring cost to connect a distributed sensor network.

And in reality, in real world, 300m is not a thing, right?

If you want a kilometre is also not a thing, right? Nowadays we're talking about network that expends ten, you know, tens or hundreds of kilometres.

A few hundred metres is not even like, you know, we don't even consider a challenge.

But at that time it was a tremendous breakthrough. You know, you have a you have a sensor network that covers a few hundred metres, right, by wiring.

Okay. So that's the first one. And then, you know, that's already a decade later that, you know,

academic researchers start working on it and people start working on actual wireless wireless communication.

Right. So no strings attached now, no strings attached. Also brings another challenge.

That means you're not plugging your computation into mains power. Right.

It most likely will be battery powered. Right. It would be very it would be happen though.

But it's very silly that you have a wireless device and it needs a power cord connecting to the mains plug.

Then what's the point of having a wireless? You're still constrained by the power cable.

Right. So that's what I mean.

You know, embedded device and wireless communication are usually going side by side because there are some people start realising, oh, this is crazy.

I have a wireless device, but we're still constrained by the length of the power cable.

Um, and then, close to early 2000, UC Berkeley started working on a project called Smart Dust.

They're literally trying to push the microelectronics and embedded device to tiny, tiny like, maybe just the size of a fingertip.

Um, um, and they call it smart dust because they want it to be the size of a dust, right?

Um, we also started doing that, um, at a later stage.

Okay. So these are actually embedded systems that we design in-house.

And you won't believe it's hard for you to imagine how hard it is to make this kind of device.

You know, in 20 or 20 years ago at that time, you know, PC, PCB making and assembling the PCB at such tiny scale, they were all challenges.

Okay. And at that time, also the, uh, the computational power and the power consumption was also a challenge.

So this micro Controller, which was published.

Released by Texas Instruments. It has 256kB.

Flash Ram. I think it was 256kB of Ram, and we actually managed to fit in a TCP, UDP, IP protocol stack onto that microcontroller, right?

For a lot of software engineers, 256 kilobyte range is unimaginable.

You can barely fit anything into 256kB. Forget about a network stack.

That really took us a lot of, you know, scratching the head to try to feed the entire network stack to such a small memory footprint.

I mean, don't forget, you know, that's just a that's just the, the the service code, right?

You still need to have your application code, right? That's just a service called providing the network communication.

You have you have a lot of other things. And forget about doing machine learning.

There's no machine learning at that time. Um, and then everything cost power, right?

Wireless communication is probably the most power hungry, um, element of an embedded systems and and you and and and it's a surprise to find out.

Actually, memory might be memory. And sensing might be the second most power hungry element for embedded device.

In fact, the more memory access, the more memory read and write you're doing, the more power consumption you're causing.

At that time, we didn't know that. We think, okay, it's already on board, right?

You know, it should be very power efficient. Not necessarily the case.

Right. Memory access is also power hungry. And you can imagine, you know, this is a $0.50 New Zealand.

New Zealand. $0.50. Right. And that's the that was the lithium ion battery that we were using at that time.

So at that time for this device we stopped battery.

This device can survive for six hours not extremely long.

But you know that's already a breakthrough at that time. But if you put it in any real world application, that's far too short, right?

Right. And then, you know, we you know, the technology is improved and we also improve our design.

So this design is different from the previous version. Okay.

So this is already the fifth generation. And the microelectronics and the microcontrollers are becoming far more power efficient.

The wireless communication will also becoming far more power efficient.

And with this one with a small coin cell battery. If you only do hourly communication, this device can actually survive ten years.

Okay. So you can actually see and this device was like, you know, probably 6 or 7 years after the design of the second generation.

So in seven years, the technology has advanced so that we can go from six hours to ten years.

Okay. That's a tremendous jump, right. Um, but again, you know, this is just the technological side.

There's still a lot of design challenges that, um, you know, you need to you need to be aware of.

And when you are designing an embedded system or any real world system, you should actually keep those in mind.

Oh, and another topic I want to cover is, uh, the communication side.

Um, of course, you know, in the old days. Um, researchers do write their own protocol, right?

You can actually write your own protocol, uh, and network stack if you want.

But more and more since the network are becoming so complicated, um, driven by professional bodies like Tripoli and also,

you know, industrial, you know, company alliance, for example, Bluetooth.

Bluetooth is actually a communication protocol made into a standard by an alliance of companies.

Uh, there are few very, very well known wireless standards, you know, communication standards, protocols released.

Okay. The first one is um, 02. 11.

I'm sure everyone heard of that. What? What's that? What's AoE 2.11?

Anyone want to take a guess? So the protocol that is the Wi-Fi standard.

Okay. And every sub, every subversion, there's a letter attached to it.

Right. So, you know, the first version is 802. 11 A.

That was a very old, very early stage Wi-Fi. I can't even track what is later now.

Is it I or H. You know, it's it's it's it's it becomes very advanced now.

Okay. But fundamentally that's IO2 point 11 standard um, that already spanned across multiple communication layers.

Right. Have you guys, have you guys done software age 364. You have done that.

So do you know, do you know the the layers of communication protocol stacks?

You know, you you have physical layer. You have medium access layer.

Yeah. Link layer is, you know in relation to Mac layer. Right.

And you have network layer, you know, the overall seven layers I don't remember all seven of them.

And the top layer is the application layer. Right. So many of that um, you know defines the bottom layers.

So that to ensure That every device can talk to each other.

Right. That's that's that's one of the beauty of having the standards.

Believe it or not, in the first version of Wi-Fi, because that was the first version.

Actually, many Wi-Fi chips released by different companies can't talk to each other.

Because every company was trying to do something slightly differently on their own.

And at the end of the day, even though you claim, okay, I'm using, you know,

Wi-Fi version one device can't talk to each other when the device when when the network chip is actually released by different companies.

That happened at certain stage. Okay. So that again shows you how important it is to have a standard.

And everyone follows a standard. Right. And this one is probably less heard of A0 2.15.4.

Anyone want to take a guess? What this.

What is this used in? Is any one of you interesting home automation products?

You know, Xiaomi products, Philips products, you know, lights that you can turn on.

Have you heard of about Zigbee? No.

So Zigbee is one of a low data rate sensor network protocol.

Okay, so this is actually the bottom two layer of Zigbee.

Have you heard about protocol called thread or matter?

If you if you if you keep in mind these words, you know,

at some point if you go to PBX website and you try to see those home automation devices and see what communication they're using,

you know, Zigbee thread matter, they are the the low data rate,

the low data rate communication protocols that makes use of this, uh, standard at a lower level at a physical impact layer.

Okay, UTG use layer protocol to use a higher level.

MQTT does not depend on this. Okay, MQTT can sit above Zigbee and thread.

Yeah, MQTT is closer to application layer now.

Yeah okay. Yeah. So so again this true.

Or if they have different very different ideas in mind. Okay.

The L2 point level was targeting longer range uh much higher data rate for example video streaming applications.

And obviously it has a much higher power consumption.

Uh, if you, if you, if you look at IP, IP packet, you know, a packet from an IP network, you will see that packet is very complex, right.

The header might be four bytes. Alright already. Right.

The header is just the address. It's not even the payload. It's not even the data part.

It might be already four bytes, right? For for low data rate communication network.

This is an absolute waste, right?

I mean, for low data rate, the entire packet might be 16 byte.

There's no way you can spend four bytes for the header. Right.

And header is not even the only overhead right. There's header and there's the closing bit and there's security.

And you know there might be encryption keys.

And at the end you realise oh there's only like you know 30% of the packets actually for the data payload,

which is very different from low data network standards. They want to maximise the payload as much as possible.

And they don't want to send a very long packet because everything costs power, right.

And everything costs time. Okay. So the data rate is much slower.

Okay. They're not targeting video streaming. They're targeting sensing sensor data.

You know, like a the temperature or, you know, your motion data.

Um, not like streaming a high resolution video. Okay, so they're targeting low, low power consumption.

Um, and they're actually in a lot of real world application right now.

Way more than 20 years ago. 20 years ago, when we just started this.

Uh, you come, you can barely find anything in the market that make use of this kind of communication networks.

But nowadays, you know, it's all over the place, right?

And and since we're talking about wireless communication, one thing we cannot avoid is the network architecture is topology.

How do you connect all the devices together? Right.

It needs some. It needs to be interconnecting an orderly manner so people know how to find each other and start a communication.

Yeah. Okay. So the two simplest, um, communication architecture.

The first one is Star Network. Okay, so Star Network.

Uh, as the name suggests, it's like a star. There's one single central node.

Every device. Talk to each other through this node. Okay.

So this node, this end user node doesn't know how to reach any other end user node.

It only knows how to reach the central base station, right?

It doesn't care what other nodes are existing. Write whatever communication that it wants to make.

It will talk to the central node and the central node will forward it out.

Okay. So this is what we call single hub.

Okay. So there's only direct connection in Star Network.

Okay. Now this my this my thing. You know um unrealistic right.

Like, what kind of use can a star network have in reality?

Believe it or not, it's actually, you know, quite popular in certain networks.

Have you guys heard Laura when that's one of the rural, um, rural communication network.

So, Laura, when another network called SIC Fox, uh, they actually adopt, uh, they actually adopt Star Network.

Okay. So you have a single base station that talks to each individual and devices.

So any device only talk to the base station.

But the technological advancement they have achieved is they've met this single hub distance to between 10 to 20km.

Right. So they've expanded the communication coverage. That's how in reality this network can find its use.

Okay. But the downside of that network is although the coverage is very long, the communication speed is extremely low.

It's almost like sending text messages. Okay, so it's like they're only allowing, you know, four bytes of data every 15 minutes.

Right. Extremely low communication rate. Okay.

But they can actually make the communication distance much longer.

The consequences battery if it's transmitting over a longer distance.

It does. That's that's why that's why it doesn't want you to do transmission very often.

Right. And and and in terms of distance wise that communication is already very power efficient.

Right. If you compare if you compare with, you know, anything in that physical distancing like a cellular network.

LoRaWAN is far more power efficient. Okay. But the data rate is very small.

It's very low. Okay. So that's one network topology.

A more common network topology is mesh. Okay.

So so so most of the IP network falls into the mesh category.

Right. So basically a mesh network means every node can reach out to every other node, either directly or indirectly.

Now if you want to do if this node want to reach out to this node then it needs to know the route.

Right. So the problem the challenge of routeing comes in.

So you need to you need you need to have node that can do relay.

Okay. And you might need to have a higher level node that has a routeing map to tell okay.

Oh you want to find that guy. This is the path you should take.

Right. So the challenge of routeing becomes in place.

But mesh is capable of supporting a much more complicated network architecture.

Right. And it also allows you to easily expand the network coverage.

Right. Even though say this communication distance is limited in, say, 100m.

This mesh network still allows you to cover, you know, several kilometres by relaying data through multiple nodes.

Okay. So that would be a multi hop communication. Okay. Because the communication goes through multiple nodes it's very hard to.

I mean this is a design trade off. Okay.

Again in this course um one of the most important thing I want to tell you is we're not saying any technologies right or wrong.

Okay. It all comes down to your application requirements and whether a technology is more suitable for that requirement.

Okay. It's all design compromise. That's one of the most important things when you're designing embedded systems.

Right. If you if you are only sending temperature data.

Maybe you really don't need to have a Wi-Fi, right?

If you're only sending, like, you know, two bytes every. And bear in mind, for example, taking temperatures.

Example. How fast do you think the room temperature can vary the room temperature?

Changing temperature is actually harder than you think, right? You know, changing room temperature in in 30s is already very challenging.

Consider if you put on, you know, if you turn on your air conditioning, how long does that actually impact the room temperature.

Right. So if you do temperature sensor, maybe sending two bytes of temperature data every five minutes will be more than enough, right?

Every two two bytes every five five minutes. You really don't need a WiFi to do that, right?

So, you know, if Wi-Fi is not existing in the original infrastructure, then maybe you can think of something more power efficient.

Okay, again, old design compromise, right? So start going through some of the design challenges is something that you need to keep in

mind when you're designing this kind of embedded systems with wireless coming connectivity,

you know, wireless sensor network, essentially. So the first and most important thing is energy, right?

Um, again, most of the embedded devices are battery powered, right?

It would be it would be very, very strange to see, you know, you want to have a mobile embedded device plugged in to mains power.

So if it's battery powered, uh, that creates a management issue, right?

Either you, you know, first of all, you need to know whether the battery is depleted, right?

That that requires monitoring effort, or you find a way, you either replace or you recharge, right.

So replace. That's a that's a tremendous effort. I can I can I can share with you my personal, uh, experience.

Uh, actually we, we, we deployed, um, some agriculture sensors.

You know, monitoring, you know, soil, soil properties and, you know, air quality, air properties.

We deploy 15 of them somewhere outside the outside world.

You cannot imagine how much effort we need to put in to monitor the battery level and go in there, replacing the battery every 3 to 4 months.

How do we locate each of the sensors? Because that's another issue, right? We actually we we actually have GPS tech so that we can find those devices.

Because if you put it in a field or if you put it in a forest, three months later,

you go to that same location, they all look different with all the weeds and, you know, things covering.

And one of the funny, funny experiences another researcher told me is that they actually put a sensor device on a tree.

Ten years later, it's inside a tree, right?

A tree actually grew over that device. They couldn't find it.

They were in. And then they were trying to test the signal strength.

And, you know, the device is actually in the tree now. So.

So replacing batteries actually a much, much. And keep in mind, I'm only doing 15 devices.

If you want to do 100 devices or, you know, 500 devices, this is not humanly possible, right.

You need to hire a few guys. Really just on a road trip. Keep replacing batteries.

How does it happen in real life scenario? I think an actual world.

Well, that's that's that's a good question. I don't think there is a I don't think there is a silver bullet right now.

I don't think there's a solution yet. You know, harvesting.

That's that's the second point, right. If you don't replace the battery then you need to find a way to recharge it.

Right. Solar is probably the most common one. You have a big battery and you have solar panels.

But then again, you know that cabling you can.

You cannot avoid that, right? Or in the research side then a lot of people are still working on recharging the battery.

Okay. Harvesting energy from different energy sources or you do wireless charging.

Okay. But long distance wireless charging is still is still not that effective, right.

Compared to, you know, very short distance wireless charging. Yeah.

Um, or you make sure that your applications design in a way that is extremely power efficient.

So once you deploy that sensor, it's a rubbish. You you make use of that sensing device for its lifetime.

Once it's dead, it's dead. You deploy a new one. Right.

And and bear in mind, it's not uncommon. Okay. Uh, actually, a lot of.

I mean, the same thing happens with space, right? Once you shoot the the satellite up there.

Satellite still have its lifetime. Right. Although much longer, you know, you know, ten, 20 years.

But when satellite is dead, is dead, it becomes a space debris.

Right. And that is actually one right now, one of the main challenges.

Right. Because it covers a piece of sky, you know, then it covers one location of that orbit.

Right. And if it's dead, it's going to occupy that space forever.

It's not going anywhere. Right? It's keep on rotating. So it is a challenge.

And then thinking about embedded device, if you put it into an environment that's a that's an issue.

Right. Because you don't want to have electronics left in the, you know, environment forever.

Right. That might cause pollution. So there's actually a lot of design challenges in that.

Yeah. So you mean self exclusion doesn't help self explosion the satellite.

Oh that's that. Well that's that's that's that's very dangerous because you have you have no control.

Where? Well, there self explosion is not going to turn everything to atom level, right?

You're just creating smaller debris shooting in different directions. So that's even worse.

Right. Certain debris may go and hit all the other satellites surrounding it.

Yeah. No, I mean, um. I mean, putting a satellite down in that manner should be done in a very, very careful way.

Right. You can't if you can't contain the debris. You better not doing it, because then the debris will, you know, its space.

It will travel in that direction forever until it hits something.

Right. It's a it's vacuum space, so I don't I don't think that's a that's a very good idea.

Yeah. And and for, for embedded systems it's even worse. Right.

Imagine if you put a device in, in a forest. So some explosion might cause a forest fire.

Right. That's definitely not something you should even think about. All right.

Yeah. So? So energy is definitely a challenge.

Okay. And and and and in terms of system design, one thing you need to realise is in embedded systems, everything's cross layer, right?

A physical layer when you design a microelectronics okay, you want to make sure that electronics is actually as power efficient as possible.

Right. Over the last two decades, you know, the microelectronic component is already very power efficient, right?

You can use mOSFET that consumes micro amps of, uh, of of current.

Right. But it was it wasn't always like that. So so, you know, component selection makes a huge difference.

Right. So when you're designing the microelectronics you need to start thinking about power efficiency.

And then on the networking side okay. The medium access layer is deciding how you can access the the the wireless channel.

Uh, you want to avoid, uh, packet collision, right?

You don't want to transmit when other devices are also transmitting, because then, you know, all the wireless message will be a scramble, right?

And in the network layer you want to find out the most power efficient route, okay.

And that's what makes routeing very hard, right.

The most energy efficient route and the fastest route and the shortest route.

The different things okay. The shortest route doesn't mean is the most energy efficient, right?

It might consume a high power just to ensure if it's single hop, then it might need a higher power consumption.

So so there's a lot of design consideration.

Um, and you often need to think about whether the energy efficient, the most energy efficient route is actually the route you want.

Okay. And on the operating operating system side, Especially for embedded systems.

Very often embedded systems doesn't necessarily have operating system okay.

It doesn't necessarily require RTOs. Very often it's just event loop.

Everything's just executed sequentially one after another. And once you reach to the last event, you go back to the first.

But you need to keep in mind. Smaller memory footprint sometimes means you need to read and write memory very often.

Right. Because there's no there's no memory hierarchy for embedded systems.

There's not like a level one cache, level two cache Ram, you know, and then disk, you know, embedded systems.

Much simpler. The more memory access you do, the more power consumption will be.

Right. So so you do need a operating system even. Uh, no, actually, it's better that you don't.

It's better that you don't. And then you you keep everything inside a very small memory.

If you can do that, that will be the most efficient way. as soon as you start having an operating system.

Itself is consuming power. Operating system means it will have some common services, right?

You know, for example, support threading or something like software features or switching between these tasks to that task.

This kind of operating system management is already overhead, right?

The fact that you need to have an operating system is already overhead. The best way is not having an operating system embedded system.

You don't have to have you don't need to.

You don't necessarily have in your project, the project you'll be doing the project to that device won't have operating system.

You can run the operating system on top of that, but we don't want you to allow it.

Is missing the point of accessing the microcontroller? Yeah, but a lot of operating embedded systems doesn't need operating system.

Yeah. And then you need to think about security. Okay.

Nowadays more and more people are starting to think about security since you're also doing wireless communication.

Um, for example, if you have a device, a wearable device that's, you know,

collecting vital sign data, you don't want people to access the vital sign data of your own.

Right? So privacy and security now also become an issue.

And if you want to do encryption again that's a burden, right.

And then you need to think about okay does my microcontroller supports hardware encryption.

Is there like a hardware encryption. Um, you know, unit in my microcontroller that can speed up the encryption.

So, you know, uh, security is also costing power.

And middleware is, you know, is not a very common term nowadays is again, it's talking about,

okay, do you want to send all the data from the edge device to a central location,

or can some redundant data be processed along the communication way to reduce the data you're sending.

Okay. So that's also a consideration. Oh, gosh. Oh I'm already over time.

Um, okay. Yeah. Sorry about that okay.

So I'm going to start by at this point. Uh, again, you know, there's no I'm not going to examine you on that,

but these are the the kind of consideration that you need to have when you're, you know, in future designing embedded systems.

Okay. I'll continue on with the self-management tomorrow. Okay.

Cool. Thank you. See you tomorrow.

Okay. I'll get this done once I'm back in time.

