[Auto-generated transcript. Edits may have been applied for clarity.]
Yeah. Uh, I've been talking about them. Maybe he's giving me an idea of what I could do.

Um, yeah. I haven't fully decided yet. What about you?

You're done. Right. Go ahead. Uh, let's remember for, like, homeless.

Um, I do like, like, casual research. There's a lot of stuff, but I do, like five minute, like, work life balance.

Like this. Yeah, because I need to, like, squeeze my three years, like, complex programming, like one and a half years.

So it's like double work. Yeah, but but it's, like, easy.

I just want to pass, like. Like this.

Like in Taiwan. Like, if you like GPA drops to zero.

Engineering degree get combo. Two summers. Yeah. I mean once you've done engineering, I don't think comps would be that hard.

I mean, it's only like four, oh three, etc. and stuff.

Yeah. This.

Is one of the things. That you like.

Yeah. Did you go to the Thursday one?

Yeah. Yeah, I went through yours. I think it looks.

Like there was not enough to cover like losses. Like It was like microcontroller.

Like in general, it's like. All right. Cool.

That's kind of like. I haven't looked up the lecture yet either.

I think the majority of, like, Kevin Owens comes in and just like the projects.

Yeah. Do we have any plan for the troops, for example?

I just travel like overseas, travel overseas during the break for like on the summer.

Yeah, all the time. Um, not looking into another.

Into the future. So, I mean, I have not got a job so.

Or an internship, so I'm kind of, like, free over the summer, but I don't think we're travelling anywhere.

Just cause, um, money's a little tight these days.

Yeah. Like, maybe, maybe the year after. I think I've had.

Planning on doing a travel. Yeah, but my family doesn't travel too much in general, so.

Yeah, I like, really like. Yeah.

He's going out. Okay. What do I mean by trying to like us.

This is like my brother used to work in New York, and I was just like, you see this photo?

This. Is going on here.

I've been there once. I definitely do like the times. I haven't been to, like, the Central Park, but it's more than like a business.

It's almost like they have, like an expo. Like machinery expo.

Like, I was thinking Orlando. And I'm just like, um, travel at the same time.

It's like very dedicated researchers. I mean, strictly speaking, if it doesn't turn out for 2015, we can just leave.

Right. Would you hit like 7000 or something to this lecture?

I don't I didn't receive any emails though. I thought.

We always in this room know half.

Half. Yeah. Just always. David. What is this? Here and then?

The next room. Okay. I completely. I completely messed up.

I thought we were in the same room for, like, both Wednesday and Thursday.

And then I went to the other room and. And.

Yeah, the first sign said there were so many students sitting there. Oh, okay.

Well. And I don't recognise any of them. Oh, okay.

Give me a second. All right. Well, I need to bring up the.

All right. This is likely to be my last lecture.

Um, but before I get started, I just want to touch first.

If you did any of. Have any of you read the project brief by now?

Give me the one page content. I think I agree with it.

Yeah. Yeah. Any one of you haven't read the project brief?

I have just started on the lab, so I got that point. Okay. All right.

Um, but just so you know, um, there will only be one more lap left before the interview, especially for Air Force.

Right. Master students, you have next week. Next week we will have one extra lab session on Tuesday.

Just to give you a, you know, more chance to talk to the GTA if you needed to.

Uh, and Air Force will be completely out next week.

Week nine for systems week. So by the time you and we'll release the The intern interview schedule, hopefully by this Friday.

So you know, you will at least get a chance to say, okay, you know what I mean?

We expect you to be available for that entire two hour session, right?

So basically there shouldn't be any time conflict. But in case there's any emergency, feel free to let me know.

But the interview is going to be Tuesday. Week ten.

So that's the week after next week. Right. And for that interview, I'll give you more information in the announcement.

But in that interview, we expect everyone to be able to read, interpret and validate the sensor data.

Right. That is the absolute fundamentals before you even considering implementing an algorithm for the rest of the project.

Okay. So just getting just reading the sensor data alone, um, will not be sufficient.

Okay. If you show me that oh, I can read the sensor data out, but you can't tell me what the sensor data actually meant.

And you know, and show me that the sensor value are sensible.

You know, making sense. Then you won't get any marks. Okay.

And also the literature review will be due in week ten.

Tuesday. Well, it's a Tuesday on Monday. I think it's Tuesday.

I think I make the I. Yeah. Tuesday. Yeah. Okay, cool.

Uh, any quick questions about project two? How do you actually validate the sensor values?

Because it's like a close box. You can't really connect to oscilloscope to it.

No. Just like sort of like move back and forth and then just try to tell like the value change.

Well, celebration. That's something for you to think about.

Right. I mean, look, um, if I, if you bought a new oscilloscope and I want you to check how valid is oscilloscope isn't the same thing.

It's still enclosed. You're not going to pull up the part that applies to any embedded devices that you buy.

Right. You know, if you pull it apart, you break the warranty. Right.

But you have to find some way to validate whether that reading makes sense to you.

Right. Whether you can trust that reading. Right. Um, since you guys are here, you know, just to give you a hint,

if you're measuring Excel acceleration, is there a fixed component that you can measure?

Oh, like sorry, but it's like, well, gravity's not going to change.

Well, gravity's not going to change from the fall from like the sky. And they're like no no no, no no, no.

Gravity's always on you. You don't have to jump off a roof to measure gravity.

Seriously, this is physics 101. Gravity is always on.

Gravity's on me now. I don't need to jump off a roof to measure that frickin gravity.

Okay. Right. You're shocking me.

This is literally physics 101. You put the device there.

The gravity is on. You cannot remove the gravity.

If you want to fly, you need to compensate the gravity. Yeah.

Make sense? The gravity is always on.

There's not a single moment on this Earth. You can get rid of gravity.

That is what's keeping you on the ground. Right.

So? So, you know, if you if you do something reasonable, you should measure something.

Yeah. But this is one. This is one part of it.

You still need to work out the magnetometer part. Okay. Yeah.

But there are ways definitely there are ways to validate your sensor readings.

Okay. I actually don't know how many of the people who are not in the class is going to hear this in the lecture recording, but I hope they do.

Um, okay. All right. Any other questions? No.

Okay, so, um, honestly, this lecture is probably more relevant to, um, the the project.

Um. Um, and I'll raise a few questions for you to think about during your project.

Okay. So, uh, today's lecture is going to focus on localisation.

Okay.

As I mentioned earlier, um, if your device doesn't know its own location, then a lot of information collected by that device all of a sudden doesn't.

Um, it's not that it's no longer that useful. Okay.

So, for example, if you if you're doing a traffic camera, right, and traffic camera is detecting, uh,

someone is breaching the traffic law or there is a traffic accident and the traffic camera cannot tell you where it is at.

Then all of a sudden, those information has much, much less value.

Right. You know, if I, if I, if I'm monitoring, uh, for example, a temperature, uh, in the sea,

do I see sea surface temperature is actually a very important scientific value to, to be measured.

Right. And if you don't know where that temperature is coming from, then that temperature value has no meaning.

Okay. So there is a term called location aware service. Okay.

It's a service that requires you to provide in conjunction with the location.

Um, of course, um, different applications requires location information in many different ways.

Um, and, you know, the the application requirement might demand different location accuracy, right?

Might demand different location frequency.

Uh, and of course, cost constraint is always one of the most important thing, you know, in terms of location Detection.

Um, you know, sometimes, you know, you require submitter accuracy.

Right. Very accurate, very precise. Uh, localisation. Sometimes you you just need to be zone based.

Okay. You just need to know, okay, whether this inventory, for example, for supply chain management,

you just need to know whether this box is inside the warehouse or outside the warehouse.

Right. You know, you don't need submitter accuracy like, you know, or exact coordinate in centimetre level where that box is.

You just need to know, okay, whether it's in the warehouse or in the truck. Right.

So, you know, location, uh, really depends on your, um, application.

Wait. Hold on. I just want to make sure that, uh. Okay.

This is all. Okay, good. Right. Otherwise, whoever's listening to the lecture recording might not hear me.

Okay. So, um, today we're going to cover two major categories of how localisations can be done.

Okay. Um, look, localisation by itself is actually a research field.

Okay. So there are many, many, many localisation techniques.

Uh, we're going to broadly categorise them into two categories. Um, I don't really like to call it network based.

It's more like a wireless signal based.

Okay. Um, the and then the next category is what we call sensor based.

Now the fundamental difference I used to separate these two categories, uh, the wireless signal based approach.

Uh, on this slide, they require additional devices to be installed in the environment to achieve localisation where sensor based,

they're more self-contained. Okay. They don't require any additional devices to be in the environment.

They work by itself.

Okay, so the most typical example for wireless signal based is radio frequency based localisation, which I'll show you the technique later on.

Uh, the fundamental idea is uh, is basically deciding the distance between the transmitter and receiver.

Okay. If you can figure out the distance between the transmitter and receiver,

then you can kind of figure out the distancing and you can kind of figure out the location of the device.

Okay. But again, that said you need the transmitter and receiver.

It doesn't matter whether your own device is the transmitter or the receiver. You need additional device in the environment to be on the other side.

Okay. So this type of technique definitely requires additional, uh, infrastructure.

The most obvious example is GPS, right?

Without the satellites, you know, just by having the GPS receiver on your phone, nothing's going to work, right?

It's the fact that, you know, there's a, you know, transmitter on the satellite sending you the GPS signal.

That that's the whole fundamental fundamental of this type of techniques.

Although we're saying radio wave propagation on the slide. But the idea the fundamental idea applies to acoustic signal as well.

Sound signal. Right. This is actually how in the old days I'm not sure if you sing um, robotics research for example.

In the early days, there were research trying to deal with design robots dealing with multiple customers.

So, you know, by using sound source and this arriving direction, the robot can decide, okay, Which customer am I talking to?

Okay. So the same fundamental idea also applies to Soundwave.

But of course Soundwave. Soundwave travels much slower compared to radio.

You know, electromagnetic waves. So the distance resolution is bigger.

Okay. So this type of techniques requires infrastructure.

Sensor based usually accelerometer, gyroscope. They're they're completely self-contained.

Okay. Just like the sensors in your mobile phone.

Right. You don't need additional infrastructure to make your accelerometer work.

Right. It will be able to detect the orientation of that device directly.

So that's the fundamental difference. Of course, the the techniques associated with those sensors are also very different.

Okay. So for example acceleration the most fundamental technique will be double integration.

All right. If you're sensing acceleration integrating a once you get velocity integrating integrating it twice you get distance right.

But again that's every time step you get a distance.

Okay. So commonly you know for for for for sensor based techniques they need to use dead reckoning.

Okay. So what dead reckoning means is they're finding the location in a iterative way.

Okay. Step by step. So that means with dead reckoning, you need to know your initial location, right?

Your initial location coordinate zero zero is where you start.

Right. Every future step is actually a relative distance to your previous point.

Okay. Very different to very different to a network based approach.

Network based approach usually can give you an absolute Coordinate, right?

Because it has infrastructure. You most likely know the location of the infrastructure, but in sensor base it's completely self-contained.

So it needs to start from a non initial location and accumulate its distancing.

Now that actually brings in a problem related to sensor drift,

which means every little tiny mistakes you made along the way is actually accumulating right?

So if I if I just try to quickly draw something.

There. I mean, if we give you an example.

So assuming this is your initial location.

Uh, focus. Okay.

Does not focus. Okay, so you know this.

You're assuming that this is location 000, right?

And you measure a distance. Okay.

That's D1. Now, if if this is actually not if this is not the actual D1, this is what you measured your actual D1 is this.

Then this arrow will stay there in your system.

Right. You cannot remove it. Right. There's no feedback to allow you to detect the error.

So in your next step you will start here as your starting point, and a relative distance will be added on top of that, right?

If this step D2 made the same mistake and there is a shortfall, the error will keep accumulating.

Okay. And now look at this example. I'm only talking about straight line.

I didn't even add angles. Okay.

If if I add angles situation will be a lot worse.

If this is the ground truth and you measure exactly the same distance but in a wrong orientation, this will be your starting point for your next step.

Okay. Even if you detect every step correctly at the end.

Your final result will have the error. Okay.

It's completely self-contained. It doesn't have a mechanism to have feedback to self-correct itself.

Okay, so post distance error and orientation error will accumulate.

And I'll show you an actual real world example, um, how bad it can be.

Okay. The arrow accumulation can go beyond your imagination, you know,

depending on how fast you're sampling within like 30s to one minute you're, you know, distancing arrow can be like, you know, 30m.

That's completely off. Okay.

Um, but of course, there are ways to, to to compensate that in your project, to your you'll be doing something similar than this.

But but this issue does exist in practical applications. All right.

Um, so I will start with, uh, wireless technology for localisation because this is one of the most common, uh, techniques.

Um, there are many wireless wireless technologies, right?

You know, the old days, QG, GSM, LTE, which is 4G.

Wi-Fi. Bluetooth. Ultrasound. RFID.

There are many, many. As I mentioned in my previous lecture, there are many, many different wireless protocols.

Okay. Different wireless protocols have different communication range.

Right? Different communication range means different coverage of your system and also different resolution okay.

So for example NFC you know your your access card is a type of NFC right.

It has to be extremely short distance. Okay.

So don't even imagine that you can use NFC to do a building wide localisation.

It can but it won't give you a very good resolution right. It won't give you like sub metre accuracy.

It will be zoom based. It will. It can only tell you okay. Am I at that door or not when I swipe the access card.

Right. That's the type of resolution it can achieve. Okay. Now, probably the most commonly used for indoor localisation will be Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.

Because of their abundance already in existing building.

All right. Now there are two basic type of approaches that we will go through.

The first type is which is the majority type is a range based algorithm basically finding distance.

So let's get on with that. Okay so as we mentioned for wireless technology you are basically trying to find distance between a sender and a receiver.

Okay. So the first thing you can do of finding out the distance is using time of arrival okay.

If the sender sends out a packet received by a receiver and that packet,

that message has a timestamp, then you know when that package is sent and when you receive.

Right. So you know the travelling time. And this is electromagnetic waves.

So you also know the speed. Okay. So if you know the time and the speed, you know the distance between the sender and receiver.

Very simple concept. Yeah. The same thing happens with sound waves as well.

But again sound waves travels much slower so their distancing resolution will be larger.

Okay. The arrow will also be larger.

Um, but there's a there's a trick when you when you send the packet with time stamp and the receiver considers that timestamp,

you're assuming that the sender and receiver are perfectly synchronised in their clock, right?

They see the same time in their clocks. But that's not necessarily true.

They're embedded systems. They have their own different clocks.

Okay. And this timing we're talking about is at least millisecond level.

Okay. We're not talking about one second or two seconds, one second or two seconds.

You'll get a huge distancing error already. Right? So.

You know, the fact that they don't share the same clock means time of arrival unless the two devices are perfectly synchronised.

Otherwise, time time of arrival, as a simple approach might give you a lot of, um, calculation error.

Okay, so this is a very simple one way time of arrival.

Then there's an advanced version, a round trip, time of arrival, two way time of arrival means that from the sender, it sends a packet.

Right. Time one and time two are on their own clocks. Okay.

And then the receiver sends a time back.

Okay. So for each node, we're only working out the differences according to their own timestamp.

Yeah. So we require no synchronisation between the two nodes.

Right between t1, t4. That's no AIS timestamp between T2 and T3.

That's node js timestamp, right? So in this manner, the reliance on the two devices being perfectly synchronised becomes much less.

Of course, that's a round trip. That's why you need to divide it by two. Okay.

That is the time. And then using that time times velocity will allow you to get distances.

Okay. So two way time of arrival is a lot more accurate. Okay.

Another ranging technique is angle of arrival. Okay.

So not talking about time, but from which angle the signal actually comes in.

Okay. So usually this will require multiple receivers.

Okay. I'm not sure if you heard something called a microphone array or you know, laser array, right?

This is pretty pretty often used in microphone array and radar.

Right. You have multiple receivers. Then you can precisely figure out the arriving angle coming from the transmitter.

Right. And by figuring out the arriving angle, you can extend the pathway.

And at certain point remotely those two pathways will join.

Okay. And that's where your that's where the location is. Uh.

Of course. Um, you know, this one without doubt, was at a much higher hardware cost.

Right. Because you need to achieve good accuracy.

The array typically contains 8 to 16 receivers.

Okay. At the very minimum, you probably need four receivers to to reach a good accuracy.

Okay. And another ranging technique is, um, signal strength.

Okay. Um, as you know, wireless signals, when they propagate, their energy will reduce as they go along the distancing.

Right? So this is actually the phrase transmission equation, right?

This is the famous equation that tells you how the power of the transmitted transmitted message, uh, is related to distance r.

Okay. So the longer you go, the weaker the energy it is.

Right. So you can actually measure on the receiving side, you can measure the received signal strength.

Right. The weaker the signal means, you know, the further away the transmitter is.

Okay.

So many radio devices, many radio ah transceivers will tell you the received signal strength indicator RSI okay RSI depending on the vendor they have.

Um, they have different formulation.

So what I'm showing you here is uh, the RSI here is actually one of the simplest, uh, formulation, um, which you need to actually calibrate.

Okay. So usually you need to calibrate a parameter a, a you need to measure the RSI in DBM and one metre as a reference distance.

And then you can you're able to calibrate this equation to work out future RSI for your device.

This is something you need to check the datasheet okay. Every vendor every transceiver supplier might have slightly different calibration.

So you need to check the datasheet to find out how you can calibrate RSI.

Um but again. This is a common pitfall for every wireless based localisation technique.

Right there is there's always attenuation or multipath fading.

That happens for wireless wireless signals. Okay. So so wireless signal.

You know this ranging technique although it gives you an absolute, you know, absolute location.

Uh, the signal quality itself is usually not as good.

Okay. Now if you are able to find the distance or the angle, then there are usually two approaches that you can use to find the exact location.

Okay. So the first approach is called triangulation.

Okay. Using angles right. If you know your receiving node location you know antenna number one.

Antenna number two, if you know the two receiving nodes location and you know you can measure the arriving

angle from this two node and then you extend out the the transmission pathway,

Assuming that is a direct line straight line, you will be able to find out the location of the remote device.

Okay, so this approach using angles is called triangulation. Yeah.

The other approach, which is based on ranging, which is based on distance, is called trilateral vision,

which is assuming that you are you are able to find the distance between the sender and receiver right about the time of arrival.

Techniques that we mentioned.

Now if you can find the distance assuming this is the sender, then the receiver or the distance between the sender and receiver is D1,

then that means the receiver must be a point on this circumference, right?

You don't know which point, but it's definitely a point on the circumference. Okay.

So in order to find the location of the receiver, you need multiple senders.

What were usually called anchor points. Right? The anchor points.

The centres are usually the infrastructure device that you know their location already.

Okay. And if you're able to know the distances from the receiver to all three anchor points, you're able to draw three circles.

And where they meet is the location of the receiver.

See if you only have one circle. The receiver can be any point on the circumference.

Okay. If you only have two circles, the receiver can either be this point or this point.

Okay. Only when you have three circles you're able to find the exact location of the receiver.

But again this is the ideal world situation, right?

You know, in real world situation the circle might not even join together or the circle might fully, you know, overlap with each other.

So if I, if I draw, you know, show you quickly what I mean.

So. The three circles might be like this.

Um, so where's the receiver? There's no, you know, there's no intersection point.

So, so there are a lot of, you know, post-processing algorithm that you need to do to actually correct that.

And there can be also the case where. The three circles intersect like that.

So in fact the point can be anywhere in this region.

Right. The the the scenario that shows on the slide is the perfectly ideal situation where, you know, you know,

very precise measurement that the circumference is all joint at the same point, but in reality it may not be the case.

Okay. But this is what we call trial iteration, Okay.

And this is actually the approach that's used by GPS. Okay.

But the only catch you need to understand is if you only want to detect a location on a two dimensional plan,

then you need to have three anchor points. That's non collinear, meaning that you cannot use a straight line to join these three points.

Okay. If the old 3.03 anchor devices aren't exactly the same straight line, you won't be able to do that.

Okay. And if you want to detect location in a three dimensional space like GPS,

then you need four anchor node which is non coplanar, meaning that those four devices must not be on the same 2D plane.

Okay. They need to have that 3D location differences for you to figure out a three dimensional location.

Okay. And for GPS, uh, very often, um, you need more than three devices.

I think usually GPS requires you to have at least signals coming from six satellites.

And and that's something that's usually called multilateral.

Okay. Trilateral. I mean, if you have three and kind of multilateralism if you have above three, um, anchor nodes.

Right. So in reality, multilateral ation is a more commonly used approach.

Okay. Any questions?

Broadly speaking, which one is more energy. Um consumptive.

Which one consume more energy. The sensor based or like the wire space.

Um, like very application specific. I think wireless communication based is usually more power consuming.

Okay.

But usually you select 1 the one or the other based on the accuracy requirement because like I said, the sensor based one just isn't that accurate.

And in reality you can do a lot more complex design, right?

Again, a very typical waste fusion, right? You do both, but maybe you don't do the wireless one as often.

Okay. Bear in mind the wireless approach gives you the absolute coordinate.

Okay. It's more power hungry. Yes, but it gives you a more precise absolute coordinate.

So you can actually use wireless. And this is what actually it's done in reality.

You can use the wireless approach as a feedback to correct the sensor based approach.

A hybrid is a hybrid approach, right. So you don't need to do wireless approach very often.

Maybe you do it every 10s, but that every 10s is allowing you to correct all the mistake you've made with the sensor based approach from the course.

Which one is more expensive? Like. Like why?

Oh, in your project two will not allow when asking you to do the wireless approach.

Yes. Right. Again we wanted to, but the project timing is just not long enough.

If I have another two extra weeks, I might ask you to do that right?

Okay. Cost perspective is like a WiFi transmitter.

Always do a more expensive or like individual sensor. So it's like I think in the course in the past what we did is using Bluetooth.

So it's actually very power efficient. Of course the cost like how much money o cost.

Yeah. How much money if you want to like spend.

So like either sensor like the WiFi transmitter like which one is more expensive I think these days they're all very cheap.

Yeah. Yeah, I um yeah.

No, I mean, they're all very cheap.

I mean, honestly, many of the microcontrollers probably has Wi-Fi transceiver and IMU embedded in the microcontroller itself,

so it's already one piece. Yeah, so I didn't I didn't look into the specific cost, but both are really cheap nowadays.

Yeah. Okay. But having said that again Wi-Fi still need external infrastructure.

You need to have all the WiFi access points. Right. So the accuracy of that Wi-Fi does not come with the device you bought or design.

Right? The accuracy of that Wi-Fi also is impacted by the infrastructure. Okay.

But the accuracy of the for example, acceleration is determined by your device.

Right. So there's a lot of pros and cons that you need to take into consideration when you're designing the actual system.

Right. So for example, you know, I did a project in the past about how a search and rescue in a fire fighter scenario.

Can you assume you have Wi-Fi coverage when a building is burning?

You can't. Right? It's just it's just not going to happen, right?

Like redundancies without building. For example, you have like, Wi-Fi sensors.

Again, this is not your call. You don't choose which buildings burning.

And you know how much redundancy the building has. Right.

This is not a correct assumption to make, right?

Of course, you can make that assumption if you ask the firefighter to deploy the redundancy.

Right. That's the extra hassle. Okay. So so so so there you know there are actually a lot of practical considerations.

Okay. So the last approach for you know wireless signal based approach is called fingerprinting.

Fingerprinting is actually a very simple concept. It's like fingerprints, right?

It's actually a mapping exercise. So take this room as a as an example.

Fingerprinting basically means okay, I have my device.

I, for example, go every half a metre that direction this direction.

And then I cover the entire room with half a metre resolution and measure the signal, receive signal strength.

Right. So it's like you're creating the fingerprint of receive signal strength for this piece of physical environment.

That can actually give you a very good accuracy. Okay.

But the downside is every physical environment you need to repeat the process okay.

They actually do this kind of thing when they're designing, for example, train stations.

Right. Once you won't have permanent deployment and you know you're designing something that's so expensive already.

Um, they can do something like that. But every different physical environment.

You need to do fingerprinting over again. And if you change the physical environment, for example, you're adding a few metal shelves.

That reading might change. So you probably need to do the mapping process over again okay.

So fingerprinting can give you very good accuracy but it's very cumbersome.

All right okay. So I probably won't cover the summary of uh this techniques.

Um, the the other approach is the inertial navigation inertial sensors or inertial measurement unit.

Uh, this basically is for accelerometer and gyroscope.

Okay. So bear in mind this this sensors are not new.

Okay. Accelerometers and gyroscopes are not new. They are used in, uh, for example, aeroplanes.

Long, long, long time ago. Space spacecrafts long, long, long time ago.

It's just the sensor itself might be this big. Okay, now the mEMS, the microelectromechanical system, the mEMS sensor is more recent.

Okay. That's what that's the technology behind, you know, minimising inertial measurement unit so that it can fit into a phone.

Okay. Accelerator and gyroscope by itself.

They're not new. Okay. But the minimisation is more recent.

Okay. Again minimisation is not completely cost free.

It also means the accuracy goes down. Okay. Accelerometers and gyroscope can be highly highly highly accurate.

Right. You're not getting the same accuracy for the ones you use on the phone and for the ones you use on the aeroplane.

You know, when you're using using that device on an aeroplane, you want it to be extremely accurate.

Okay. Um, and there are two types of, uh, inertial navigation systems.

The systems I use on the, you know, things like aeroplane, they usually have a stable system,

meaning that the sensor is mounted in a certain orientation. It will keep that way.

Okay.

Very often, for example, you know, if you have if you play with a drone before uh, very often there is a gimbal device associated with the sensor.

So it doesn't matter how the external device makes physical manoeuvres, the sensor will stay in that global orientation permanently.

So whatever sensor data you get, you know it's received measured in that orientation.

Okay, this is not the case for strap down systems, which is the system, the type of system that you will be using in project two.

Right. With embedded device, if you hold your phone like this, or if your phone is in the pocket.

The orientation of your sensor will be different. Okay. And if you process the the recode signal in the same way, the algorithm won't work right.

It might be completely upside down. You might think your y axis. You know it's in the same way, but your y axis is completely upside down, right?

And then you're subtracting the outer gravity and you're making the situation even worse.

Right. So the tricky bit about strap down sensors are systems is you need to work out the orientation.

Now this is something I want you to think about. I'm open for you to make assumptions in your project too.

Right. It's a wearable device.

I'm happy for you to assume that the device is reasonably levelled, so you don't need to work out the orientation dynamically, because that will be.

There will be another algorithm on its own. Okay. But this is something for you to for you to investigate and find out.

Okay. Again, acceleration is a very simple rule, right?

The only thing you need to keep in mind is you need to consider gravity. What you're actually measuring.

What the sensor gives you is the actual acceleration plus gravity in certain axis.

Right. Depending on how your device is oriented, you have 3D accelerometer, right?

The acceleration is measured in three axes x, y, and z, right.

Depending on how you orient your device, the gravity only applies in one axis, right?

The gravity will not apply in all three axes. Okay, so how do you make use of that to validate your sensor data?

And how do you remove the gravity component. Because that should not contribute into the algorithm.

Perhaps it's something that you need to think about in your algorithm okay.

Right. So the the algorithm itself is very simple, right?

Like I said, acceleration. Double integration will give you distance.

If you're using gyroscope, then you need to do the orientation correction.

And you need to do a single step integration that will give you orientation.

But in your case it's different. In your case you're using magnetometer okay.

Magnetometer is slightly better in the sense that it will give you images global magnetic field.

Right. So it will give you an absolute orientation measure. But magnetometer also has a lot of vulnerability on its own right.

It's very sensitive to metal stuff. Right.

You know, later on if you try bring your device, you know, when it's collecting magnetic data,

try to move the device closer to a metal object like a shelf in the in the lab and see whether that impacts your reading.

Okay.

So then for your project, you need to look into certain calibration to adjust your magnetometer readings so the orientation measurements are accurate.

Okay. So depending on the sensor you use you need to do different investigation to improve the data data quality.

Now in project two we're actually asking you to do something much simpler.

Okay. We're not really asking you to work out the, you know, raw distancing.

We're asking you to do step detection and orientation detection.

Okay. So you're basically detecting steps. You're not you're not actually directly detecting the distance movement distance.

Okay. Detecting step is a different thing. So you should try to observe try to collect some data after you verify the the sensor readings.

Try to collect some acceleration data. See for yourself. Human has.

Human has repeated walking gait walking patterns.

Right. That will produce repeated acceleration patterns.

Okay. So I want you to do a bit of a reading in your literature review.

Investigate the signal. You know, observe the signal yourself to see how does the acceleration data change according to your steps,

and how can you accurately detect the steps. Okay, so step detection is one thing.

Okay. Detecting the step is one thing. Estimating step length is a different thing.

Okay. My step length will be different to for example a female right.

So step detection without doubt what has less accuracy compared to actual distance sensing.

Okay. But you can try to do the lens estimation or the fun side project.

Okay, I probably won't go through a lot of details about the the rotation matrix.

So I include this this slide and the next slide for completion.

For completeness, a conversion a rotation matrix is basically how you apply to adjust your orientation.

Okay. But adjusting orientation in 2D is easy.

Adjusting orientation in 3D is much, much harder. Okay.

So so so so in your project, I'm perfectly okay to accept that you're holding the device in a fixed orientation, right?

But at the end of the day, the final interview for your project two is how accurate your step detection and orientation detection is.

Okay. So it's not about whether I'm happy or not. You know, it's about your accuracy.

Okay, so your mark actually comes down to how accurately you can detect the steps and orientation.

But I do want to show you one example though. Okay. So this is actually one of the um indoor localisation algorithm that we designed in the past.

So this is uh, this is using a accelerometer gyroscope.

So the diagram on the left most is a diagram without orientation correction.

Okay. You can see you can see the distance is not far off right.

But if you don't have a correct orientation your path is completely wrong.

Your trace is completely wrong. And you can you might be in the wall. Yeah.

Okay. And after orientation correction, the tracing becomes a more accurate.

Okay. So I just want to show you, you know, distancing may not be you know, the critical downside orientation is equally important.

Right. If you don't have correct orientation you might end up with something like this.

Okay. Right. So this is something some of the things that I want you to consider for your project,

and probably for the first, uh, intern interview, these three questions is the most important.

Okay. You need to get a sensor data, right. In an interview will ask you.

Okay. How do you interpret that sensor value? Does that value make sense to you?

Okay. Do you observe any fluctuation. Right.

And the second the middle question do you need all the sensor data. This is something for you to decide.

Okay. Bear in mind you're only doing step detection. Okay.

With a fixed orientation. Do you need?

Three axis of accelerometer. Do you need three axes of magnetometer?

Something for you to observe and investigate.

Okay, but those three questions are the are the starting point that I would encourage you to start thinking about your project.

Okay. Again, like I said, there's not a lot of time left, especially for Air Force because you'll be away next week for the entire week.

So so so so I'd really encourage you to start as early as possible.

Right. Because by the time you come back in week ten that the Tuesday is the intern interview,

and we cannot postpone that because postponing that we can 11 will leave two few,

you know, two less time to between intro interview and the final interview.

Right. And we have to do the final interview in week 12. Okay.

So be careful about the timeline. You know, timing management is the most tricky part.

Okay, so, so, um, and this is one of the main reasons why why I don't have a lot of lectures.

Because I really want you to start focusing on getting the project done. Okay.

So this is going to be my last lecture. I will go to the lab, uh, you know, from time to time, uh, next Tuesday,

I'll definitely be at the lab, uh, for the first half an hour, in case if you have questions.

So I'll, I'll use lab as, like, my office hours to answer questions.

All right. So feel free to come to the lab and consult with us.

All right. Otherwise, honestly, you guys, apart from old masters, um, I would trust your, um, you know, time management ability and leave it to you.

Okay, cool. Thank you very much. And I will see you around. All the best.

Thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you.

